Pole dancing empowers women in Egypt Pole dancing is often stigmatized in mainstream Egyptian society. But the acrobatic exercise is increasingly in demand among women in a country not famous for championing women's rights. Manar El Mokadem moves suggestively along the pole, climbing up and spinning down again, landing on her glass high heels. The class instructor climbs up the pole yet again and splits her legs in the air. The class applauds. El Mokadem started exercising with pole dancing more than seven years ago. What started as a hobby became a full-time job when she opened Egypt's first pole dance studio in Cairo in 2013, a courageous step in a conservative society where many people view the exercise as obscene and shameless. For El Mokadem, it is an expression of liberty — but more than that, it is a form of exercise that is gaining in popularity in the North African country, even if it usually takes place behind closed doors. Social taboo El Mokadem opened Pole Dance Egypt in 2013 Egypt, with its more than 92 million inhabitants, is a country of extremes: poverty beside wealth, liberal and conservative attitudes. Belly dancing, which is as seductive and erotic as pole dancing and has been a part of Egyptian culture for centuries, is often frowned upon - but unfailingly, scantily clad belly dancers are part and parcel of wedding celebrations all over the country. At the same time, many Egyptians are wary of pole dancing, which is often associated with red light districts and prostitution — both unmentionable in mainstream Egypt. El Mokadem is aware of the general perception, but that hasn't stopped the 24-year-old from exercising through the sport she discovered as an architecture student in Britain. She opened Pole Fit Egypt, a pole dance studio for women, just months after her return home. At first, her parents were shocked. "They worried about what the people might say," she said. Under the radar El Mokadem has trained more than 2,600 women from all walks of life Aware of the fact that no one can evade social control in a city as densely populated as Cairo, El Mokadem makes sure that only the women who sign up for her classes know what is going on in her studio, located on the second floor of an apartment building in the capital's Garden City neighborhood. "The people think it's a regular fitness studio," El Mokadem said, adding that she tries not to attract attention or provoke anyone. They do not perform in public. "We have firm rules," she said, explaining that stipulation also applies to the other instructors in her studio. Nonetheless, her classes are full. Pole Fit Egypt, which also offers instruction in aerial arts, has trained more than 2,600 women in pole dancing. To satisfy rising demand, El Mokadem has opened two more members-only studios for women from all walks of life, including students, doctors, designers and stay-at-home-moms. Most are Egyptian, between 20 and 56 years of age, and they hear about the pole dance fitness classes by word of mouth only. Veils and the occasional niqab are removed during practice for safety reasons. "That's the only way we can hold on to the pole without slipping," says El Mokadem. Dancer or doctor Soliman says pole dancing has made her more self-confident and disciplined Rihan Soliman, a 22-year-old medical student, said she started taking classes at Pole Dance Egypt two years ago. Her parents know about her passion since, after all, she had a pole installed in her room. What they don't know yet, Soliman said, is that she'd rather be a dancer than a doctor. The young woman said she will finish her degree all the same — for her parents. "Pole dancing has made me more self-confident and more disciplined," she said, adding that she has discovered a strength she never knew she had. It makes her feel "sexy, like a rock star" — something her parents would never understand or accept. Egyptian society is staunchly conservative, even after the 2011 revolution that toppled the country's longtime authoritarian ruler, Hosni Mubarak. Back then, women took to the streets in hopes of more rights, more political participation and, most of all, more freedom. While Egyptian women may be more self-confident these days, not much else has changed. Women's rights are still discussed in public, and efforts are being made to avoid reducing women to the role of wife, mother and homemaker — but the road to gender equality is long. The image of the inefficient, inferior woman is still deeply ingrained in Egypt's patriarchal society despite the fact that 90 lawmakers in parliament are women — more than ever before — four women are government ministers and Egypt this year appointed the country's first-ever female governor. Forced marriages, female genital mutilation and sexual harassment are still part of everyday life in Egypt. Sometimes, however, women break out of the role society has assigned them — like pole dancer Manar El Mokadem and the many other women spinning, swaying, splitting and swiveling in Egypt's pole dance studios.


Egyptian rappers fight against censorship Politically charged rappers risk reprisal from the Egyptian state. Some have already been intimidated while others continue to push the boundaries of censorship with their music, reports Mat Nashed from Alexandria. "Egypt Rap School for Biggenas" is plastered across the wall of a tiny recording studio in Alexandria, Egypt. Above it, hang three portraits: Notorious BIG, Bob Marley and Tupac Shakur. Like millions of fans, Temraz - his stage name - grew up listening to these icons. Now, the 29-year-old Arabic rapper is part of Revolution Records, an underground label that he helped establish in Alexandria 11 years ago. "We decided to name the label Revolution Records because we thought rap was still a very weird [genre] to Egyptian ears," Temraz said, before rolling a cigarette. "We also named it 'revolution' because rap music is about rebelling. To us, [rap] is about rebelling against everything." Read: Egypt's women find their voice against sexual harassment Revolution Records started out with 14 members, but now there are only four. The group is one of many hip-hop movements in Egypt. Cairo, the capital, has a bustling scene. But Alexandria is considered the pioneer of rap music in the country. Permalink http://p.dw.com/p/1Bh3h Before the Arab Spring, rappers from Alexandria released tracks that mocked social norms and crony political elites. The lack of mainstream attention even enabled some artists to push the boundaries of censorship. And while their music was gaining traction, it wasn't popular enough to invite a crackdown from the state. But in today's Egypt, where thousands of youth are in jail for criticizing the regime, rapping about politics is riskier than ever. Rapping to ridicule Shakur (photo, above) is the stage name of a 31-year-old artist who is part of a group called DaCliQue 203. He said that most rappers have been reluctant to ridicule Egypt's President Abdel Fattah el-Sissi. His group, however, is one of few exceptions. In February 2014, DaCliQue 203 released "Ana Malak," which means "I'm the King." The track was a remix of a song that Shakur originally recorded in 2005. The new version was made to mock el-Sissi who was by then fixed in power. Notorious BIG, Bob Marley and Tupac Shakur bedeck the wall at Revolution Records' studio "The lyrics go like this," said Shakur, as he proceeded to recite his impersonation of el-Sissi. "I'm not on the right and I'm not on the left. I'm not an Islamist nor an anarchist. I just follow the money so show me the money." The song was daring. And yet, Shakur wouldn't record another track for three more years. He said he couldn't bring himself to make another one. Not after his younger brother, a former supporter of the outlawed Muslim Brotherhood, passed away suddenly in his home before "Ana Malak" was released. Read: Marteria - a German rapper in Africa "We always fought about my love for hip-hop," said Shakur. "[My brother] thought I was wasting my time. He thought I should be writing articles about politics instead. But at the same time, he remained curious. He always wanted to know about the lyrics I was writing." Other rappers became increasingly political while Shakur took a break from hip-hop. In April 2016, Revolution Records released "Masahsh Keda" - "That's Not Right" - on YouTube. The group appropriated the phrase from el-Sissi, who often says it condescendingly when addressing his citizens. The group made a music video for the song and included English subtitles. "We sampled el-Sissi's voice and incorporated it in our music," Temraz told DW. "The track did well when we first uploaded it. I think it received more than 200,000 likes." Despite the success, Temraz feared that the song might bring reprisal. After the track was released, members of Revolution Records were invited to Denmark to perform in a concert. Temraz was anxious when he arrived at the Cairo airport. He thought he would be arrested. Lucky for him, nothing happened. Weeks later, the group was informed that "Masahsh Keda" had crossed a line. Their friend, who worked in the presidential palace, warned them that the government wouldn't tolerate another track like that again. "We had to stop," Temraz said. "I gave up trying to change this country for the better." Moving away, coming back Not everyone lost hope. Some rappers tried to broach sensitive topics without explicitly blaming the state. Y-Crew, which is one of Egypt's first hip-hop groups, released a track titled "Blinded" nine months ago. The song was about the abuse and violence that street children face in Egypt. "Mainstream music in Egypt is just about love. It doesn't talk about real problems," said Omar Bofolot, one of the original members of Y-Crew. "We want to talk about real stuff. But we don't want to preach to people about what they should do." The group has recently moved to Dubai to work on their latest album. They told DW that they are also losing hope that their music can make a positive impact in Egypt. "We been rapping about social and political issues since we started," said Shahin, the second member of Y-Crew. "Nothing is changing [in Egypt], and we're getting sick of it. Our next album is just going to promote peace, love and unity." Shakur, however, won't stop rapping about the issues that matter to him. In January, he released his comeback track. And now, he's writing lyrics about the refugee crisis in Egypt and Europe. Thousands of refugees and Egyptians have died trying to cross the Mediterranean from Alexandria. Shakur knows their stories firsthand. He's been a migration advocate for years and has even collaborated with some refugee rappers in Egypt. The oppressive political climate doesn't scare him. Even if Egyptian rap becomes more commercial, he vows to never censor himself. "I have to keep it real," he told DW. "The price might be bigger. But Egyptians are paying a heavy price anyways."


Opinion: A heavy blow to Egyptian civil society A new law in Egypt strictly limits the work of non-governmental organizations in the country. That is not what revolutionaries took to the streets for in 2011, says DW's Khalid El Kaoutit. The fatal shot has been fired - Egyptian civil society is dead. Soon the government's misdeeds will go undetected. Political opponents, should they ever be called before the courts, will no longer be afforded legal counsel. The world will never again hear about torture in Egyptian prisons - it won't even know if political prisoners are being held in them. For over the last five years, such abuses were only brought to light by the work of human rights organizations. The image that President Abdel-Fattah el-Sissi and his supporters have been happily propagating, that of Egypt as a stable country and a reliable partner in the fight against terror and curbing streams of refugees, is not to be tarnished. That is the express desire of the regime on the Nile. And its new nongovernmental organization (NGO) law is designed to turn that desire into reality. Back to the Mubarak era It only took President el-Sissi six months to move the extremely controversial law regulating the work of NGOs through parliament and ultimately sign it. Egyptian activists described the proposal as a "massacre" of human rights groups and NGOs. It is more restrictive than rules under former dictator Hosni Mubarak. Still, despite national and international criticism, the current government insisted on passing the law. The official justification is that the regulation of NGO activities is necessary to ensure national security and to stop the supposed influence of foreign "powers." DW's Khalid El Kaoutit German Chancellor Angela Merkel visited Cairo in March, between the time the bill passed through parliament and el-Sissi signed it. After her meeting with el-Sissi, Merkel announced that the Egyptian government was willing to reauthorize the work of German political foundations operating in the country. Merkel emphasized the work being done by such organizations and its importance for the development of Egyptian society. That development was also a central demand from Egyptians when they took to the streets in 2011. Total control The law stipulates that the 47,000 or so NGOs currently operating in Egypt have one year's time to comply with the new regulations. Foreign organizations, among them German political foundations, must now pay the Egyptian state roughly 15,000 euros ($17,000) before they will be allowed to resume their work in the country. That is small change for the Germans in light of Egypt's strategic importance for stability in the region. However, a more meaningful hurdle is the stipulation that Germany's Egyptian partners will face much greater scrutiny than they have in the past. Read more: German political foundations stuck in a rut in Egypt amid growing restrictions The law declares, for instance, that field studies and interviews may only be conducted under the supervision of authorities. And the results of such studies and interviews may only be published with government permission. That is as if one party involved in a conflict would allow reporting but would itself choose interview partners and also authorize all such interviews before they could be published. Those who do not abide by the rules will face stiff fines and long prison terms. Is that any way to ensure the neutrality and objectivity of such reports? Hardly. No place for criticism Chancellor Angela Merkel's words in early March sounded like a last glimmer of hope in terms of the pressure that Western leaders could apply to Cairo. Yet, they were nothing of the like. For President el-Sissi has no need for civil society. He has never pretended that freedom or human rights would have any priority in his concept of rule. Instead, his concept is based on the security and stability that can only be guaranteed by an authoritarian regime. That has been evident over the last several years. Activists that uncover corruption, torture or police brutality are troublemakers that must be silenced in el-Sissi's eyes. The fact that el-Sissi signed the NGO law is just another logical step in his reign. And the victims will be all those who took to the streets in the 2011 revolution to fight for a better, more just, and yes, more stable Egypt. Have something to say? You can share your comments below. The thread will remain open for 24 hours after publication.


The voice of the revolution speaks from afar Yosri Fouda - Where I come from Yosri Fouda is one of Egypt's most well-known investigative journalists. During the Arab Spring, he thought the country was heading for a progressive revolution. But soon thereafter the tides turned and growing media oppression forced him to leave the country. In order to continue to freely and critically speak about issues important to his region and its people, Yosri came to Germany to be a host at DW. On his weekly talk show The Fifth Estate, Yosri combines in-depth news analysis with investigative reporting that brings audiences in the Arab world an unfiltered and independent perspective on critical issues. Yosri began his career as a BBC reporter and was the London bureau chief for Al-Jazeera. At the Egyptian broadcaster ONTV during the Arab Spring, he was known as the "voice of the revolution."


Ousted Egyptian President Mubarak freed from detention: lawyer Ousted Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak has been released from detention. The 88-year-old former leader has spent much of the past six years in hospital. After six years in detention, Hosni Mubarak walked free from a military hospital in Cairo on Friday. An appeals court earlier this month acquitted Mubarak of ordering the death of protestors during the 2011 revolution that toppled him after 30 years in power. About 850 protestors were killed in police clashes with demonstrators during the 18-day revolt. The 88-year-old and his two sons were convicted to a three year sentence and ordered to pay millions of dollars in fines for embezzlement of state funds. An appeals court in 2016 upheld the conviction but took into account time already served. Mubarak was arrested in April 2011, two months after he was ousted. He has spent most of the time in a military hospital. In 2012, a court handed him a life sentence for murdering 239 demonstrators, but an appeals court in 2014 ordered a retrial and the case was dropped. Nearly two dozen former Mubarak-era officials in recent years have been acquitted of their role in corruption and protestor deaths. Meanwhile, hundreds of pro-democracy activists and Islamist politicians have been rounded up as President Abdel-Fattah el-Sissi consolidates power after toppling Mubarak's Islamist successor after one year in office. Permalink http://p.dw.com/p/16oQn cw/kms (AFP, dpa, Reuters)


Egyptian general assassinated outside home Suspected Islamist gunmen have killed an armored division commander in the Egyptian army on the outskirts of Cairo as he was leaving his home to go to work. He had served in the volatile Egyptian region of Sinai. Assailants used automatic weapons to kill Egyptian Brigadier General Adel Rajaaie before fleeing the scene in a car, Rajaaie's widow Samia Zain El Abedeen said Saturday. "Minutes after he left the house I heard gunfire, I went out to find him covered in blood ... he took a lot of bullets," she told the Reuters news agency. "He died instantly." Rajaaie was a senior commander in Egypt, which has been ruled by a military regime since the fall of Islamist President Mohammed Morsi in 2013. He is the highest-ranking officer to be killed since the takeover. Fighting in Sinai Rajaaie's sister-in-law, Huda Zein El Abedeen, said the 52-year-old general was killed on Saturday morning while leaving his home outside Cairo to go to work. "I can't tell you if it was six or 12 bullets. It was before he could get into his car," El Abedeen told AFP. The Egyptian army also confirmed Rajaaie's death. A relatively unknown group calling itself Louwaa el Thawra, or the Revolution Brigade, has claimed responsibility for the assassination. The claim could not be immediately verified. Rajaaie commanded an armored division deployed in northern Sinai, where hundreds of soldiers and policemen have been killed battling jihadists loyal to the so-called "Islamic State." dj/cmk (AFP, Reuters)


Egyptian police accused of torture Five years after the Egyptian revolution, torture within the police force remains endemic. Those who speak out usually find themselves silenced.


In Egypt, Islamic clerics give out edicts in the metro Al-Azhar has opened booths in Cairo metro stations to offer guidance and counter extremism. Egyptians have welcomed the presence of the renowned Sunni Islam institution, though some are uncomfortable, reports Mat Nashed. Imam Sayed Amr, an elderly man with a large white hat with a red top, was issuing religious edicts inside a crowded metro station in downtown Cairo. He was among several pious leaders from Al-Azhar - one of Sunni Islam's most renowned institutions - soliciting questions and concerns from Egyptians in transit. "We have come here to answer people's religious related questions," Imam Amr told DW. "But we are also here to redirect young people who are on the wrong path." Read more: Qatar crisis: What you need to know Permalink http://p.dw.com/p/2gi69 Last Thursday, Al-Azhar opened several small booths in Cairo metro stations to offer religious guidance to those who seek it. But their main motivation, they say, is to condemn terrorism and to correct misinterpretations in Islam. The move comes as the Egyptian military continues to wage a bloody counter-terrorism campaign in the Sinai against the so-called "Islamic State" (IS) -affiliated militants. Human Rights Watch has criticized the military and insurgents for committing grave abuses. However, the mass destruction in the north hasn't stopped terrorist attacks from striking elsewhere in the country. More than 100 Coptic Christians have been killed from four church bombings, and more than 28 members of state security have died in the Sinai since July. The ongoing crisis is now compelling Al-Azhar to reach out to Egyptians as they transit through Cairo. 'Preaching peace' Imam Amr said that few young men came to visit him in Al-Shohoda metro station over the last week to solicit his views about Islamic militarism in the region. And while they may have not asked him explicitly for his opinion about designated terrorist groups, Amr suspects that some of the youth have been exposed to online terrorist propaganda. "Some of the youth are listening to unofficial fatwas (Islamic edicts) that are being given by people who are not qualified to give them," said Amr. "I always try to answer their questions with religious verses. I tell the [youth] that Islam is about modesty and peace." Read more: Egyptian rappers fight against censorship Despite the concerns, Amr is quick to note that most of the questions he's answered are related to people's personal lives, not politics. Some, for instance, have sought advice about whether to stay married or to get divorced, while others have asked how inherited wealth should be distributed amongst the family. Al-Azhar is making itself easily accessible to Cairenes in metro stations Several Egyptians nonetheless told DW that the presence of Al-Azhar in public spaces is a good strategy to redirect youth who are on a dangerous path. One woman in a black abaya, who was waiting outside the booth to speak with one of the sheikhs in Al-Shohoda station, said that she was more receptive to listening to sheikhs from Al-Azhar since she trusts the institution. "I think it's a great idea that the Al-Azhar is now available in metro stations," the woman said, declining to disclose her name. "I prefer to come here than go the Al-Azhar Mashyakha [their main headquarters] since it's so far away. I also don't like to go to the mosque and speak to a sheikh whose qualifications I'm unsure about." "I used to call the number for Al-Azhar in the morning to ask them [religious] related questions. The person on the line would give me a number to call the following day so I could receive the fatwa," added Amira Abo Elazm, who was also waiting to speak to a sheikh. "But now I know I can just come here [to Al-Shohoda metro station]." Suspicious motives Not everyone is ready to trust Al-Azhar despite their reputation. Ashraf El-Gindy, a middle-aged man with dark hair and light stubble, said that there is no place more secure or spiritual than the mosques. He was also uncomfortable with how the sheikhs were requesting people's personal information before providing counseling in the booth. Several people told DW that they had to write down their name, phone number and ID number once they entered. "[I fear that] if anybody asks political questions or says anything that could be understood as extremist, then their info will be given to the government and they will be watched or arrested," said El-Gindy. His fears may be well founded. Since President Abdel-Fattah el-Sissi came to power, the government has arrested thousands of political prisoners who they claim are terrorists. Most are members from the outlawed Muslim Brotherhood or secular critics of the regime. Imam Sayed Amar (right) says he tries to make clear to young men that Islam is about peace Yet Ahmad El Sayeed Abo Elazm, a high religious advisor for Al-Azhar in Cairo, insisted that there was nothing suspicious about taking down people's personal information. Sitting behind a desk inside the booth, he said that phone numbers are taken down so that sheikhs can call people back after revisiting a question. But when asked why Al-Azhar was requesting ID numbers, Abo Elazm answered that taking such info was standard practice. "It's normal," he said, though he was first reluctant to give his name to DW. "We want to know who we're talking to." Read more: Public wakers shout their way to a resurgence in Cairo Analysts say that terrorist attacks have increased in Egypt largely due to the government's brutal crackdown on all opposition. But el-Sissi has blamed outdated interpretations of Islam for the proliferation of extremism in the country. In 2015, he called for a 'religious revolution' to counter terrorism. Al-Azhar appears to be answering el-Sissi's call. Outside the booth, El-Gindy was browsing stacks of religious books that the sheikhs were offering to the public. One was called, "Terrorism and its Danger to World Peace" while another read "Correcting Perspectives." None of the titles mentioned the connection between state repression and terrorism. And El-Gindy, for one, suspects that those who confide their political grievances to religious leaders in public could suffer reprisal. "Right now, nobody can speak about politics [in Egypt]," El-Gindy said, before picking up a book and leaving the station. Badawy contributed reporting in Cairo.


Egyptian student still in jail because of T-shirt Mahmoud Hussein has spent 600 days in jail because of a T-shirt. He was arrested last year on the third anniversary of the Egyptian revolution and has still not been officially charged. Farid Farid reports from Cairo. On the front of the black T-shirt emblazoned with white text were the words "A Nation without torture." On the back was a picture of a police officer torturing a citizen. Mahmoud, 17 at the time, had worn the T-shirt and a scarf commemorating the January 25 revolution on his way to a protest in Cairo, unaware that it would land him in jail hours later. "When I visit him, I tell him if you hadn't worn my T-shirt you would have been home right now, and he would just laugh," Tarek Hussein, Mahmoud's brother, told DW. "It's so sad that a T-shirt could land him in jail with multiple accusations levelled against him." The two brothers had decided to go to the protests, Mahmoud in Cairo's downtown with his friends, while Tarek headed off to Maadi, an upmarket southern Cairo suburb. Tarek, affectionately known as Tito by activists, was also detained on the same day on charges of belonging to the Muslim Brotherhood, which was deemed a terrorist group by the Egyptian government in late 2013. "I was accused in March 2013 that I attacked the Muslim Brotherhood headquarters and in January 2014 I was held on charges of being part of the Muslim Brotherhood. How do you want to convince me as Tarek that I am both at the same time? The mind boggles!" Ongoing crackdown Under President Abdel-Fattah el-Sissi, who was defence minister in former President Mohammed Morsi's government, Egypt has seen a large-scale crackdown on Islamist and secular activists with estimates of 41,000 political detainees in jail, laws that criminalize protests and dwindling freedoms for journalists. Fast-talking Tito Tarek recounted the squalid conditions he endured in jail and how - since being released in April this year - he has just one mission: getting Mahmoud out. "Mahmoud is the youngest in our family. I don't think he fully grasps why he's imprisoned because he's so young," he said. "I am proud of him because he's young, yet still so strong in his resolve to comfort other prisoners." Tarek says he won't give up until his brother is released Hussein has partnered with Amnesty International to pressure the Egyptian authorities to release his brother. In their report Generation Jail published earlier this year, the human rights organization noted "the authorities have made it clear that they see anyone who deviates from their political narrative as a threat, whether they be an internationally known political activist or just a student who is wearing the wrong T-shirt." 'Everything that is wrong with Egypt' Nicholas Piachaud, Egypt researcher at Amnesty International, told DW "this case sums up everything that is wrong and criminal with Egypt. It shows the lengths security forces are willing to go to crush dissent. The crackdown has gone much further beyond the famous names - the thousands of ordinary Egyptians languishing behind bars including Hussein." DW has repeatedly sought comment from the Attorney General's office regarding Hussein's case but to no avail. Last week, Tarek posted a picture on his active social media accounts showing his brother with signs of torture and handcuffed to other detainees. In front of them molotov cocktails, a Guy Fawkes mask that has become a popular accessory for protesters worldwide, and Hussein's scarf have been hastily arranged as evidence of the detainees' supposed terrorist affiliation. Tarek found the photo on a popular Facebook page for police officers who claimed that Hussein was part of a Muslim Brotherhood terrorist cell. The photo confirms both Amnesty International and Tarek's assertions that Hussein has been tortured. Piachaud sees torture as endemic to Egypt's system, where citizens are routinely beaten in police stations, transferred to secret locations and forced to confess to crimes they did not commit. Mahmoud's case has triggered international condemnation Clear pattern Prisoners such as Mahmoud can spend up to two years in pre-trial detention without any official charges and in some cases it can be extended. Photojournalist Mahmoud 'Shawkan' Abu Zeid, who has spent over two years in prison, only had a trial date set last week for early December. "There's a clear pattern of revenge from the judiciary against all those involved in the January 25 revolution. We are seeing that all of Mubarak's men are free and those who participated in the revolution are now in jail," Tarek noted. He is frustrated that Mahmoud has faced over 20 delays in a trial date being set, with judges renewing his detention period by 45 days each time. Yet Tarek is resolute that his brother will be freed. "Mahmoud will be free no matter what, after several years he will be free but his best days will have been spent in jail. Who will be held accountable for all these years and wasted time?" he asked.


Egyptians on social media react after court revokes Morsi death sentence Egypt’s high court of appeal has overturned a death sentence against former president Mohammed Morsi. How are Egyptians on social media seeing the verdict? Mohammed Morsi, who was ousted in a military coup in 2013, was sentenced to death on charges of being involved in a jailbreak in 2011. Egypt's court on Tuesday annulled the death sentence and scheduled a retrial for the former president and five other Muslim Brotherhood members. "The death sentence for Morsi is being overturned. May this happen to all those innocent falsely imprisoned people," celebrates Twitter user Salloma Eldeeb. Under current Egyptian president Abdel Fattah El-Sissi, who took power in 2014, tens of thousands of people have been imprisoned. Many of those jailed have been accused of having ties to the Muslim Brotherhood, which aligned itself with Morsi. The Muslim Brotherhood organization has since been outlawed in Egypt. "You embody the spirit of the Egyptian people," tweets user Abdo Mohammad with the hashtag "Morsi." The former President is widely revered by some parts of Egyptian society, as he is considered to be the country's first democratically elected president. He also has a doctorate in materials science from the University of Southern California. Some pro-Morsi Egyptians use the honorific "the educated one" to refer to him. "Morsi isn't being executed and Mubarak's children are being released. Egypt is delighted," tweets Egyptian Hesham Lofty wryly. Past Egyptian leaders and their families have been getting off the hook for their alleged crimes. Former Egyptian strongman Hosni Mubarak, who was in office from October 1981 to February 2011, was during the January 25 revolution. His two sons, Alaa and Gamal, had spent four years in prison for corruption until being released in 2015. "No to opening up the crossing. No to releasing traitors. No to a retrial for that spy Morsi. Traitors deserve execution," writes Aboraya Nahla.  The "crossing" she mentions is the Rafah crossing between the Egyptian Sinai Peninsula and the Palestinian Gaza Strip. The Rafah crossing had been recently opened for a few days by the El-Sissi government to allow for movement of people and supplies. The Gaza Strip is controlled by Hamas, which is considered to be an offshoot of the Muslim Brotherhood. Due to this Twitter user's anti-Morsi, anti-Muslim Brotherhood stance, she is against Hamas and thus any opening of the Rafah crossing. A Muslim Brotherhood supporter making a pro-Morsi hand gesture  Rebellion campaign Although Morsi became the first democratically elected of president of Egypt in 2012, many in the country are critical of his rise to power. They argue that after Mubarak was overthrown, the only part of Egyptian society that was mobilized to vote were the conservatives, who propelled Morsi into office. They also argue that the coup leading to Morsi's ouster in 2013 was democratic due to the Tamarod (rebellion) campaign. Some 22 million Egyptians signed a document called the Tamarod sheet, which was a petition to bring Morsi down by way of the military. Although Morsi's death sentence has been overturned, he still has to serve 20 years in prison as confirmed by the High Court in late October. He's currently being held in the Borg Al-Arab prison in the Mediterranean city of Alexandria.


A 'heartbreaking' tale from Egypt's revolution Five years after the Egyptian revolution there is little sign of change for the country and its people. There are still dozens of arrests of anti-government activists. Farid Farid examines one particular case in Cairo. Ahmed Said, a vascular surgeon who had worked in Frankfurt for a few months, treated bloodied protesters in a field hospital near Cairo's Tahrir Square in November 2011. In the infamous clashes between the military and protesters in Mohamed Mahmoud Street, where 42 were killed, Said carefully tended to the wounded against the backdrop of graffiti murals commemorating victims from Egypt's watershed year. Said was arrested along with four others in November 2015 from a downtown Cairo café hours after attending a silent protest in remembrance of the victims from the 2011 street clashes. He was sentenced to two years on charges such as blocking traffic and his final hearing is scheduled later this month. "He was coming for a quick break to finish paperwork and was planning to continue his life back in Germany," Lamia, Ahmed's sister, told DW. "He is so intimately attached to Egypt, he loves walking the streets especially in the morning. He could have finished it all in Germany but chose to come back because he misses the country so much." He was tortured in Abdeen police station, according to his sister, and went into a hunger strike last month to protest the treatment he received. Said was then transferred to several prisons before ending up in the notorious maximum security Aqrab (Scorpion) wing of Tora prison. "We don't understand how he has ended up in a prison reserved for terrorists and the most hardened criminals that threaten the state. How can he be there when he was just coming for a holiday?" she added. Regime crackdown Said's arrest comes at a time of intense crackdown from the current regime ahead of the fifth anniversary of the January 25 revolution. This month has seen the arrest of activists, Facebook pages' administrators and a sweeping raid of over 5,000 apartments in downtown Cairo. Five years after the revolution, the regime is still harassing those who are critical and could threaten its existence "The regime is panicking. It's a strong regime, it's powerful, it's in charge, it has its hands on all aspects of life. Despite this and despite crushing all centers of opposition and rounding up dozens of youths and opposition figures, the regime is acting in a bizarre and senseless way," Khaled Fahmy, a visiting history professor at Harvard University, told DW. "That date has become a symbol of an existential threat to the state." Fahmy, who was tasked by the Ministry of Culture in 2011 to head a national committee to document the revolution, argues that the modern Egyptian state has experienced multiple revolutionary moments and that 2011 was the latest culmination of a citizenry asserting its rights. In all of these instances, the regime of the day has tried to quell opposition from student groups to labour unions to Islamists but he noted that the ongoing crackdown is unprecedented and is in response to "a phantom that has been haunting the regime." Turbulent times Since President Abdel-Fattah el-Sissi ousted Mohamed Morsi in July 2013, Egypt has endured a turbulent political and economic path. The regime has been roundly criticized for its flagrant abuse of human rights, stifling press freedoms, various security lapses and worsening a battered tourism sector. Eliane, Said's girlfriend who declined to give her last name to DW, has deeply felt Cairo's turbulent political atmosphere in a personal way with his arrest. The Free University of Berlin anthropology student had met Said at a protest in June 2013 Frankfurt and found him to be charismatic. They had lost contact for months after but Said was determined to build a life together with Eliane in Berlin putting in place plans to facilitate the move. The paperwork was to include a marriage certificate - bureaucratic proof of their relationship. Fighting for Said's freedom Revolution reloaded "It's a sad thing to witness - heartbreaking actually," Eliane told DW about Ahmed's arrest in the larger context of freedoms being rolled back after the revolution. "Hope is a dangerous thing. I am trying to stay aware of what might happen and prepare myself for the worst." "I miss his presence all the time. I miss knowing he is safe. I miss everything about him," she said. German Greens MP Franziska Branter raised Said's case in a parliamentary session coinciding with Egypt's Foreign Minister Sameh Shoukry's visit to Berlin last week, while Amnesty International has labelled the charges he's being held on as "trumped up." In a poignant letter from prison and which Amnesty International published, Said writes "I did what I did in order to feel free and to take back my freedom before it became nothing but a memory - and in order to preserve the last ray of light cast by the revolution." As Egyptians prepare to mark the fifth anniversary of the revolution amid further arrest and a security crackdown, Said's case is emblematic of a revolution that is still unfolding.


Egyptian court strikes down death sentence against former President Mohammed Morsi Former leader Mohammed Morsi will now be granted a fresh trial over allegations he orchestrated a 2011 prison escape. The charges against Morsi were brought by the formerly military government that deposed him in 2013. An Egyptian appeals court revoked the death sentence against former President Mohammed Morsi on Tuesday and ordered a retrial. The deposed leader has been through numerous trials over charges that he orchestrated a prison break during the country’s 2011 revolution that ousted long-time strongman Hosni Mubarak. Morsi and five other leaders of the now-banned Muslim Brotherhood organization were convicted by a criminal court in Cairo in July 2015. The Court of Cassation’s ruling means that now all six will be given new trials. A total of 20 Muslim Brotherhood leaders were sentenced to death in the original trial, and a total of 93 party members were convicted in absentia. The charges were originally brought against Morsi in 2013, after he was toppled in turn by a military led by now-President Abdel-Fattah el-Sissi. The change in government was followed by a crackdown against the Muslim Brotherhood, long outlawed under Mubarak. The ex-president's controversial legal troubles are myriad. He was sentenced to 20 years in prison for illegally detaining and torturing protestors, his only charge as of yet to be confirmed by Egypt's highest court. His 40-year sentence for leaking military secrets to Qatar can still be overturned and appealed. Egypt's legal system under el-Sissi has been repeatedly criticized by the international community. The violent crackdown on the Muslim Brotherhood has seen hundreds of death sentences handed out, although many of them have been overturned on appeal. es/msh (AP, dpa)


New TV program with popular Egyptian journalist Yosri Fouda Nearly two years after Yosri Fouda, one of the most renowned journalists in the Arab world, had to cancel his show on Egyptian TV, DW enables the investigative journalist to once again address his viewers in the region. DW Director General Peter Limbourg: "I'm very happy about the fact that such an esteemed journalist as Yosri Fouda has chosen DW for his comeback. It shows that DW has become a strong voice in the region with our Arabic channel."  Fouda's weekly DW program "The Fifth Estate" aims to give viewers in the Arab world the chance to express themselves to a wider audience as freedom of expression deteriorates in their own countries.  Fouda will lead his audience through the week's events with a mixture of news analysis as well as investigative reporting and in-depth interviews. User-generated content and social media elements will also play an important part.  "I'm pleased to reconnect with my viewers and readers, and it gives me confidence that this comeback will be on DW," Fouda said. "With the extreme polarisation, the heavy crackdown on any professional journalistic practice and the complete confiscation of the public sphere, the media scene in the entire Arab world is crying out for some air. I'm sure that DW is one of the few outlets in the world now which are still capable of making a worthwhile contribution," Fouda added.  Head of DW's Arabic service Naser Schruf: "With Yosri Fouda we have a journalist in our ranks whose courage and straightforwardness have been a model for an entire generation of media icons in the Arab world." Schruf added that "Yosri enjoys the trust of millions and is exactly the right journalist to bring to fruition the core idea of our format: users and viewers playing the main role, becoming directly involved in the creation of our content. We are setting an example for freedom of opinion and direct participation."  In addition to his weekly TV program, Fouda will also be commenting on the situation in the Arab world on DW's Arabic website www.dw.com/arabic. His first article will be published on Saturday, June 25.  Yosri Fouda started his career in 1994 as a reporter with the BBC, covering conflicts in Bosnia, Africa and the Middle East before joining al-Jazeera as its London bureau chief, where he introduced investigative journalism to Arab viewers through his popular show "Top Secret." He then joined the Egyptian independent channel ONTV to front its primetime show "Last Word," which gained him the reputation as "the voice of the revolution." Fouda has contributed to many leading newspapers, including The Sunday Times and The Guardian, and he has authored/co-authored seven books including the bestsellers "In Harm's Way" and "Masterminds of Terror."


Reem Maged: DW's guest at the GMF Egyptian security officials have demanded that DW partner broadcaster ONTV stop showing "Women at a Turning Point." The interview format, hosted by Egyptian journalist Reem Maged, is produced by DW and ONTV. Deutsche Welle has broadcast the show weekly since May 2 as part of its Arabic TV programming. DW condemns the Egyptian officials' intervention as a massive affront to press freedom and free expression. Germany's foreign broadcaster has pledged its support to ONTV in Cairo in the latter's efforts to continue to produce and broadcast the show for an Arab audience. On Saturday, May 16, DW proceeded to present the third episode online and on TV. ONTV says it is exhausting all avenues to continue producing the show and possibly distribute it on other platforms. In the series "Women at a Turning Point," courageous women take a stance on social and political issues. Reem Maged is one of the most influential voices and popular presenters in Egypt. "Economic, social and cultural topics must also finally be taken up and discussed widely," she said at the beginning of May, marking the first broadcast of the German-Egyptian coproduction. "The show is culturally valuable and important for our Arab audience. Women can learn many things first-hand about significant personalities and their projects," explains Naser Schruf, head of DW's Arabic program. "DW is promoting socially critical discourse, emphasizing dialogue and the presentation of cultural diversity along the way," Schruf adds. In the first edition of "Women at a Turning Point," Egypt's cultural heritage was in focus through a conversation with researcher Shahira Mihrez. The second episode featured the renowned Egyptian photographer Iman Hilal as Reem Maged's interview partner. The topics discussed included her pictures of the Egyptian revolution. Reem Maged has already hosted a political talk show for Egyptian broadcaster ONTV in the past. The new series stems from a partnership between DW and ONTV that has been in place for four years. As part of this collaboration, Reem Maged will be a guest from June 22 to 24 at Deutsche Welle's Global Media Forum in Bonn.


Police brutality thrives in Egypt Egyptians protested against police abuse four years ago but not much has changed. Indeed, the brutality and abuse have only gotten worse, as Farid Farid reports from Cairo. Ahmed Abdel Ghani's attempted murderer lives in the same apartment block as him. The police officer who shot at him four times in May 2012 lives on the ground floor while Ahmed hobbles up the damp stairway on the fourth floor on his crutches from two bullets that he sustained in the altercation with him. He is still receiving rehabilitation after five major operations on his left shin and right thigh. Abdel Ghani is mistrustful of Egypt's police force but remains defiant. "I am not scared of them [police officers], I've done nothing wrong," Abdel Ghani told DW. He recounts how he was coming back home from a long shift sculpting Pharaonic figurines, which he proudly displays in the small apartment where he lives with his mother, when he was confronted by the police officer's younger brother and his friends who were blocking the entrance to the apartment block. An argument broke out and minutes later the police officer came down from the local police station manhandling Abdel Ghani but he managed to escape from him momentarily. "He got out his gun quickly and shoot two bullets which struck me then two bullets after that barely missed me. I couldn't feel my legs," Abdel Ghani said. "The authorities haven't moved on my case, there hasn't even been a trial date set after three years since I filed a complaint with the public prosecutor against the police officer." Five operations later, Ahmed still needs treatment on his leg The worst year of human rights abuses Abdel Ghani's plight fits a larger pattern of police impunity and increased brutality in the past four years since the start of the Arab revolutions in 2011. "It definitely has been the worst year in how authorities have abused citizens across the board," Day Rahmi, a senior researcher at the Nadeem Center for Rehabilitation of Victims of Violence and Torture, told DW. The center compiled a report claiming that there were 289 cases of torture, 272 cases of death outside legal norms, 119 cases of disappearance, and 63 injuries due to reckless use of weaponry by authorities in the first year of president Abdel-Fattah el-Sissi's rule. The regime has been highly criticized most recently for passing a stringent counter terrorism law that cracks down on freedom of expression for journalists and civil society activists as well as allowing security agencies the power to detain citizens suspected of terrorism without any due process. "Torture is institutionalized in the authorities' politics. We are not dealing with single incidents of some rogue police officers. These deaths are happening across police stations all over Egypt, not just in major cities," Rahmi added. In the past week, a video viral video emerged of a police officer in a metro station beating and swearing at a man after he had complained that his fiancée had been sexually harassed. The whistleblower who shot the footage claimed, via a well known activist on Facebook, that he had been personally threatened by unarmed informants associated with the Ministry of Interior patrolling his home. The ministry earlier this year had set up hotlines for citizens to report police abuse but have been the perpetrators of such abuse themselves. Rahmi, questioning the seriousness of the ministry's efforts to combat police abuse, noted that "not one police officer has been convicted commensurately for a crime they had committed even when there's clear video evidence." DW contacted the Interior Ministry repeatedly to seek comment on this case and other abuses, but to no avail. Culture of impunity Abdel Ghani tries to avoid the police officer who shot him around the drug ravished and impoverished area of Imbaba, a heavily populated area of informal housing in northern Cairo littered with piles of rubbish and clearly considered an afterthought in governmental urban planning. The marks and scars go beyond the physical damage However, he has not been spared further abuse at the hands of other police officers even after his horrific injury. "I was sitting on the corner of our alleyway and another police officer started slapping my face and hitting me asking me if I had sold drugs. I hurled abuse back at him because he exacerbated my injuries from the bullets, which he didn't know about even though I was on crutches," Ghani explained. "It's known in broad daylight that these supposed sting operations are all just for show. The corrupt police officers are in cahoots with the local drug dealers," he added. Abdel Ghani spends his days raising pigeons that flutter through his tiny balcony and undergoing psychological and physical rehabilitation sessions. He does not hold out much hope that his situation will change anytime soon as long as the culture of impunity within security agencies in Egypt remains the same. "It's so ironic if you raise your voice, swear at them and stand up to them they will respect you. They will still beat you but at least you have your dignity in tact."


Opinion: Egypt's next insurgence is only a matter of time The police state has returned to Egypt - and the regime hardly differentiates between terrorists and legal political opposition anymore. Egyptians will not stand for this forever, says DW's Naser Schruf. It's sad but true: even when they are totally legitimate, large-scale protests against the ruling regime damage a country's economy and its social peace. But in the long run, regimes whose power is founded on repression and arbitrariness hurt a country even more. Egypt is a prime example. Today, the Egyptian revolution of January 25, 2011, seems to be miles away from its goals. Individual freedoms, freedom of the press and of expression, social justice, fighting corruption, a life in dignity for everyone - these goals earned the brave members of the protest movement a lot of respect and support the world over. But today there's nothing left of this enthusiasm in Egypt. On the contrary: resignation, anger and dissatisfaction reign, especially among the young generation. After nearly four years of chaos, battles for power and regime changes, they hardly have enough hope left to dream of a modern - and better - Egypt. Terror doesn't justify human rights violations But when Egypt's authoritarian acting leadership under former Gen. Abdel-Fattah el-Sissi feels challenged by terrorists, it's not just a pretense. It's a real danger, which becomes especially clear looking at the Sinai: the militant group Ansar Beit al-Maqdis has considerable destructive influence there and recently officially joined the terrorist "Islamic State" (IS) that has spread terror and fear across large areas of Iraq and Syria. DW editor Naser Schruf One has to see it clearly: these jihadis don't fight in Egypt because of a lack of freedom or human rights - they only want to create their own reign of terror. When Egypt's current government fights them and other jihadi groups, even with military means, it deserves all the international support it can get. But this fight does not justify the systematic restriction of human rights, freedom of expression and the right to protest. Regardless of whether it is jihadis, members of the Muslim Brotherhood, left or liberal forces - el-Sissi's government doesn't even make the effort anymore to distinguish between terror and legal opposition. More accurately, it uses the terror to justify his repressive politics in front of all those who are unhappy with el-Sissi's authoritarian leadership style. The international community should look very closely. They cannot let themselves be turned into accomplices in the face of Egypt's need for support. It is clear even now that the recently passed anti-terror law will lead to more radicalization rather than protect the country from terrorists. Justice serving the regime Unlike his predecessor Mohammed Morsi of the Muslim Brotherhood, el-Sissi doesn't antagonize the country's judiciary. He actually praises its independence. In reality, he can trust that the judges make decisions that suit him when it counts. Politically motivated verdicts against journalists or anti-regime activists fit this bill, just like the acquittal of former leader Hosni Mubarak, who was pushed to power by the military just like el-Sissi. The Mubarak acquittal seems like the final ending point of the revolution, not just for many Egyptians. It was probably also supposed to show Egyptian security forces and the current political leadership that they don't have to fear being held accountable for human rights violations against the opposition and protesters. That might work for some time. Egypt has, unfortunately, turned back into being a full-fledged police state. But the miserable economic and human rights situation, shrinking tourism, the dependence of the country on Gulf states' money and, last but not least, the combined solidarity of the Islamic, left and liberal groups will eventually boil over into massive protests. It's only a matter of time until Egypt's next revolution.


Egyptian photo blogger wins The Bobs 2014 A 23-year-old blogger and photojournalist from Egypt won The Bobs' highest honors for online activism. Mosa'ab Elshamy was recognized for his powerful work from the streets of Cairo. He relies on his camera even in the worst situations. Whether it's street battles in Cairo or whether he's photographing demonstrators who aren't in the greatest mood, Egyptian photographer Mosa'ab Elshamy is always close to the action. The 23-year-old was studying pharmacology during the fall of former Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak. Photography was just his hobby at the time. That changed during the Egyptian revolution, when Elshamy came face-to-face with the power photos can have during a crisis. "I had to go," he told DW in a Skype interview. "I saw it as my job to take these pictures, and I noticed that more and more people wanted to see them." He quit his studies and instead focused his attention on photojournalism. It wasn't long until his photos started appearing in international media, including "Time Magazine," "Paris Match," "The New York Times" as well as "Rolling Stone" magazine. He has also worked with major press photo agencies and has seen his images printed on the front pages of newspapers and magazines around the world. Photos without a journalist's filter Elshamy posts on Twitter, Facebook, Flickr as well as on his website. The site is where Elshamy tells his stories in photos and photo essays. Themes include the Egyptian revolution, injustice, mourning. His images also document the daily lives of the people he meets: laughing children with ice-cream smeared faces, people hanging clothes on a laundry line atop a building as well as other photos that capture life when people don't realize there's a camera pointed at them. They're photos that show a slice of normality in a chaotic situation. His proximity to people is visible in many of his photos. He brings across other people's raw emotions and presents them in an unfiltered way. Such photos are difficult to take, Elshamy said. "The last thing that people want to see in these kinds of moments is a camera. So I had to learn to approach the people I wanted to photograph very carefully." In the middle of the riots that shook Cairo after the revolution, Elshamy said he had to be especially careful - and even become invisible - adding that he was in danger whenever he chose to raise a camera to his eye. His photos show the unexpected: a man standing in an angry crowd just moments before he is shot, the moment when fathers carry their dead children in their arms, the moments when men and women cry in despair as chaos surrounds them. These are the scenes Elshamy witnessed and has shown the world. A language of their own It was the intensity of Elshamy's photographs that impressed The Bobs jury members as well. Tarek Amr, who nominated Elshamy for Deutsche Welle's prize for online activism, said: "This blogger reports on events with a view that we don't get from other media. He shows sides of life in Egypt that are unseen by the general public because there is a lot going on in places that are hard to reach." The Bobs jury member Tarek Amr said she was impressed with Elshamy's ability to tell moving stories in his photos. "There are 14 languages in The Bobs, and although we do not all speak Arabic, we can all understand the power of his images," she said. Elshamy said he was honored to receive the jury's recognition in the Best Blog category and that he felt encouraged to continue telling stories with his photographs and to work to improve his country. "The Bobs have shown for many years what people are doing behind the scenes," he said. "That is why I am especially happy that my work - and I - have received this honor."


Bomb blast targets Cairo police, protesters killed on Egyptian revolution anniversary At least one policeman has been wounded in Cairo on the anniversary of the country's revolution against Hosni Mubarak. Four years on, Egyptians on both sides face tough restrictions when trying to stage protests. A bomb blast wounded at least one Cairo policeman on Sunday, just days after two female protestors were killed amid tightened security across Egypt on the fourth anniversary of the uprising that ousted autocrat Hosni Mubarak. According to reports from news agency AFP, the blast targeted police stationed in Cairo's Alf Maskan district where a similar explosion occured on Friday. The blast, claimed by a jihadist group, wounded four policemen and one civilian. In another part of Cairo, activists gathered to commemorate the death of Shaimaa el-Sabagh, a 34-year-old mother who was shot dead during a rare leftist protest on Saturday as tensions ran high ahead of Sunday's anniversary. Videos posted online show el-Sabagh amongst demonstrators chanting and laying wreaths to commemorate the more than 900 protestors who died in the 2011 uprising. Gunfire, allegedly by police firing birdshot at the crowd, can then be heard before a bloodied el-Sabagh is carried away. Only the day before, an 18-year-old woman was killed while protesting in the Mediterranean city of Alexandria. At another rally there on Sunday, this time organized by Islamists, a third protester lost his life after allegedly shooting first at police. Leftists and Islamists barred from demonstrating Security forces under President Abdel-Fattah el-Sissi have clamped down hard on demonstrations. Twenty-two armored vehicles surrounded Cairo's famed Tahrir Square on Sunday, the heart of the revolt which ended Mubarak's three-decade rule. Security was also beefed up at other key points around the city after an Islamist coalition opposed to el-Sissi announced its intentions to stage street protests to mark the anniversary. Islamists and supporters of former President Mohammed Morsi, of the now-outlawed Muslim Brotherhood have faced a similar crackdown. Thousands of Muslim Brotherhood members have been imprisoned or are awaiting trial. In a televised address on Saturday, Sissi acknowledged Egyptians' frustrations but called on citizens to exercise patience, as it would take time to achieve "all of the revolution's goals." es/jlw (AP, AFP, Reuters)


Egyptians rally against el-Sissi over land deal with Saudi Arabia Thousands of people protested across Egypt after Cairo announced its plan to hand over two uninhabited islands to Saudi Arabia. Regime critics accuse President el-Sissi of trading land for Riyadh's financial support. Egyptian police fired tear gas at protesters and detained some 50 people after the Friday rallies, security officials said. The demonstrators in Cairo, Giza and Alexandria called for President Abdel-Fattah el-Sissi to resign, chanting "we don't want you, leave," and "Sissi - Mubarak" in reference to strongman Hosni Mubarak who was toppled in 2011. "The youth of the revolution are still here," 29-year old engineer Abdelrahman Abdellatif told Reuters news agency at the Cairo protest. "We are experiencing unprecedented fascism and dictatorship." Protesters gathered outside the Cairo press syndicate also chanted: "The people want the downfall of the regime," which is the signature slogan of the anti-Mubarak revolt. Money and land The wave of protests was sparked by a new demarcation deal with Saudi Arabia, which the government announced during King Salman's visit last week. The document puts the strategic islands of Tiran and Sanafir under Saudi control, ending decades of Cairo rule. Both governments now maintain that the Red Sea islands rightfully belong to Saudi Arabia, which in 1950 asked Egypt to protect them from a possible Israeli attack. However, many Egyptians accuse el-Sissi of selling territory to the rich kingdom, as Cairo kept the negotiations secret and announced the finished deal while Riyadh was pledging billions in new loans. "If we give up the lands now, there will be more future concessions for him to stay in power, for a few more months," said Alaa Morsi, one of the protesters in Cairo. Waiting on lawmakers Speaking at the Red Sea coast on Friday, the Egyptian president defended his decision and said the talks were secret to avoid public debate which could have harmed Egyptian foreign relations. Supporters of the military regime also held smaller rallies on Friday. The Egyptian parliament still needs to back the demarcation deal before it goes into effect, but most of the lawmakers are firmly in the president's camp. 'Savior' under fire The latest rallies mark the first significant push against el-Sissi's rule since he came to power in the 2013 coup. Once hailed as nation's savior from Muslim Brotherhood extremists, the former general now faces a series of crisis of trust over corruption, poverty and unemployment. Last month, the president sacked Egypt's top auditor, Hesham Geneina, who publicly stated that state corruption had cost the country billions of dollars. In addition, relations with Italy have been strained over the case of Giulio Regeni, a graduate student who was found dead in a ditch outside Cairo. Several human rights groups accuse elements inside state security agencies of torturing and killing Regeni, which Egypt denies.


When police torture with impunity Torture and abuse by the police are widespread in Egypt. The 2011 revolution has changed nothing. Doctors and aid organizations regularly report systematic use of violence by the Egyptian police.


Egyptian army opponents break their silence Egypt's Islamists demonstrated for months against the army. Now, secular activists are out in the streets to protest the co-opting of their revolution. But, the military government has a propaganda machine on its side. Accompanied by brass-band music and dignified-looking men in uniform, Egyptian Prime Minister Hasim Beblawi on Monday (18.11.2013) inaugurated a monument on Cairo's Tahrir Square to those who died in the revolution. Less than 24 hours later, activists had torn down the plaque and daubed the monument with graffiti. "Down with the traitors to the revolution: Islamists, Mubarak loyalists and the army," they wrote in blood-red letters. To bystanders' applause, one of the activists shouted into his megaphone: "We do not want to kill anyone, we do not want bloodshed. All we want is justice for the martyrs and punishment for anyone who has damaged the country and the revolution, so our country can be better." Nearly three years after the popular uprising against President Hosni Mubarak, the murderers of protesters were still at large, he shouted, adding that the new regime protects the security forces who were responsible, just like the old one did. That the murderers have now built a monument to their victims is a farce, he said. Secular protesters say the army has co-opted their revolution Criticism of army chief al-Sisi During the past four months, only the followers of ousted Islamist President Mohamed Morsi demonstrated against the army and the interim government it set up. Now, for the first time, resistance is also building among secularists. The young revolutionary activists recently stopped holding protest marches to avoid being labeled as sympathizers of the Muslim Brotherhood. But with increasing reports of arbitrary arrests and torture, and signs that the generals will not give up their privileges enshrined in the constitution, activists no longer feel they can remain silent. Opposition to the military government is gathering steam It started last week with blind activist Ahmed Harara. The 33-year-old was probably the first non-Islamist to dare to attack army chief Abdel Fattah al-Sisi publicly. He deliberately chose the date for his appearance on Egyptian television station Al Nahar, just before the second anniversary of the so-called Mohammed Mahmoud massacre, named after a street off Tahrir Square. At least 47 people were killed by security forces in a fog of tear gas and bullets as they demonstrated for the generals to withdraw from politics. Harara himself was hit in the left eye by a rubber bullet. Ten months earlier, he had lost his right eye during the uprising against Hosni Mubarak. Directing his comments to the television audience, he said: "The military council that killed these people must be held to account. Al-Sisi, who now holds the reins, was then already a member of the Supreme Council of the Armed Forces." Regime rewrites history of the revolution For the army, the respected activist's call indeed came at an inconvenient time, as it was already looking nervously toward the anniversary of November 19, 2011. The generals have been riding a wave of popularity since the fall of the unloved Morsi. But a constant stream of government propaganda has not been able to put out of Egyptians' minds the distressing images and videos with which the activists then documented the brutality of state power. The army has begun taking precautions against potentially troublesome protests The security forces have therefore tried to make the anniversary of November 19 their own. Recently, the Interior Ministry called for a national day of remembrance - for both the civilian victims and the soldiers and police killed since the beginning of the revolution. Even the Islamist Muslim Brotherhood announced protest marches, despite the fact that it had been silent when the state responded to the youthful revolutionaries with violence two years ago. Like many others, the young activist iman criticizes the hypocrisy of the regime as well as the Islamists: "The government and the interior ministry would have us believe the Muslim Brotherhood was responsible for the murders back then and that the Brotherhood wants to abuse the day of remembrance to return to power," she said. "Even though on that day last year, when the Islamists were in power, protesters were killed." A third way The majority of activists taking part in the protest are left-wing or libertarian, and are determined to wrest the authority to interpret the revolution away from the army and the Islamists. But the number of critics of the army is still relatively small. Now, al-Sisi is also in the spotlight for his actions two years ago More than 1,000 people ventured onto Tahrir Square in central Cairo on Monday night. Hundreds were involved in skirmishes there on Tuesday (19.11.2013) with Sisi followers, while army helicopters circled above the crowd. The young activist Mustafa complained that it was difficult to combat the propaganda machine of the regime. Those currently taking to the streets will inevitably be denigrated as Islamists or terrorists, he said. This makes it all the more important to show the people a real alternative: "We have to find a third way. We have to create a government that is neither religious-fascist nor military-fascist." The government has taken precautions in case similar protests ever start to gather momentum. Interim President Adli Mansur can sign a bill into law at any time that would allow the interior ministry to declare troublesome demonstrations illegal. An anti-graffiti law is also being discussed in the cabinet. Whoever takes up spray cans against the army could land behind bars for four years. By comparison, the only police officer so far convicted for his role in the violence on November 19, 2011 received three years in jail.


Egyptian interest in Mubarak's fate wanes The trial against ex-president Mubarak is in a crucial phase, with several witnesses from his inner circle testifying in the coming days. But most Egyptians are more interested in the fate of the Muslim Brotherhood. The trial of Egypt's overthrown President Hosni Mubarak is about to enter a decisive phase. Starting Saturday (19.01.2013), members of the inner circle of the former regime are set to testify on three consecutive days. Witnesses will include the former chief of police Ahmed Gamal Eddin and the former leader of the security services, Murad Muwafi. The fact that these two Mubarak allies are testifying could help clear up who bears responsibility for the death of hundreds of people during the popular uprising in 2011 that led to Mubarak's removal from office. An initial sentence against him was declared invalid in January after his lawyers appealed. Despite the prominence of the witnesses and the defendant, the Egyptian population is preoccupied with other concerns and showing little interest. "After everything the Muslim Brotherhood has done, we are hardly following the lawsuit," said Mustafa Naggar, a lawyer from Cairo. "Whether he is convicted or not doesn't make a difference. In my opinion that's what most Egyptians think. We aren't thinking about the topic anymore." All eyes on Muslim Brotherhood trial The current lack of public interest is in stark contrast to Mubarak's emotionally charged first trial, which took place in August 2011. During the proceedings, which saw a former head of state take the stand for the first time in the recent history of the Arab world, millions of Egyptians were glued to their televisiosns. The public enemy is now Morsi, and no longer Mubarak But much has changed since then. Egypt has gone through another wave of mass protests. Mubarak's successor, Mohammed Morsi, has since also gone on trial, and other leaders of the Muslim Brotherhood are due to take the stand soon. "Of course people are concentrating on the trials against the Muslim Brotherhood, because they were the last people to govern the country," said Ali, a student who protested against Morsi this summer along with millions of other Egyptians. "During [their rule] there were many problems, and people wanted to know who was responsible. Are members of the Muslim Brotherhood responsible, as the military claims, or are they the oppressed party? That still remains to be seen." Lack of transparency? Initially most Egyptians followed the trial on television The anti-Islamic atmosphere in the country, which has been encouraged by Egyptian media, comes at a convenient time for Mubarak's lawyers, who are working hard to rewrite the events of 2011's revolution. They are trying to absolve Mubarak's security forces of guilt for the violence, which is instead being ascribed to the Muslim Brotherhood. Since the Muslim Brotherhood is losing public trust, it is also becoming all the more unlikely that the results of an investigation of the revolution that was commissioned by Morsi will be taken into consideration during the trial. So far only parts of the report, which sheds a new light on the 18-day popular uprising, have been released. In these excerpts, several witnesses accuse the police and the army of committing serious human rights abuses in 2011. Observers of the trial are disappointed by its lack of transparency. Judge Mahmud al-Raschidi had initially promised to televise all court sessions, but has now declared a news embargo for the coming days of trial, citing national security concerns. Mubarak full of praise for al-Sisi Former president Hosni Mubarak is under house arrest in an Egyptian military hospital Mubarak himself seemed in good spirits in the past few days of proceedings. The 85-year-old waved to his supporters as he was wheeled into the courtroom on a stretcher. The fact that he was released from prison two month ago and is now under house arrest in a military hospital has not led to any protests. Instead, some Egyptians are nostalgic for the order of the Mubarak era in light of the chaos that has ensued since his rule ended. There is even an online campaign to encourage him to run for president again. But the nostalgia for Mubarak is largely being overshadowed by euphoria over Abdel Fattah al-Sisi, the Egyptian army chief. The popular public figure would probably win a current election hands down. Mubarak also seems to be one of al-Sisi's admirers. In a recording that was leaked to the Egyptian newspaper "Youm 7," Mubarak is heard discussing the political situation in Egypt with friends. In comments not dissimilar to ones made by members of the current government, he said Egypt needs "someone from the military, someone strong with clear goals. There are some good people in the army."


Egyptian elections to yield president-friendly parliament Egyptian elections will give the country its first elected parliament in over three years. President el-Sissi's supporters called the vote free and open, but critics said electoral laws suppress political opposition. As Egyptians head to the polls on Sunday to elect the first parliament since then-army general and now President Abdel-Fattah el-Sissi el-Sissi led the military ouster of former Islamist President Mohammed Morsi in 2013, it will mark the final step in what the government claims is a transition to democracy. But with opposition squashed and an election law seen as a throwback to the era of former autocrat Hosni Mubarak, critics have said the new chamber will serve as little more than window dressing for an authoritarian regime. "The president is quite popular in Egypt and clashing with him will not help," said Shebaq Waguih, spokesman for the Free Egyptians party, a political party funded by billionaire media tycoon Naguib Sawiris. "We believe that there will be a kind of agreement between the parliament and the presidency and a kind of advanced sharing of power." Candidates can't counter President el-Sissi's popularity The election will take place in two phases, with the first beginning in Egypt on Sunday and the second continuing next month. Run-offs will be held in December and new legislative chamber is expected by the end of this year. Parliamentary election law calls for 75 percent of the 596 seats in parliament to get to directly elected candidates, 20 percent of seats will be filled by politicians on party lists and the final 5 percent of representatives will be appointed by the president. While government supporters say the elections are free and the field is open for anyone who wishes to run, critics argue the system favors individual candidates and resembles the system under Mubarak, when wealthy individuals and those with connections to the government dominated elections. "We are not very optimistic about our chances in winning a lot of seats in the upcoming elections because the priority in independent individual system is for your ability to spend," said Khaled Dawoud, spokesman for the Democratic Current coalition which is running in the elections, and a member of the Dostour party, a liberal party founded by Nobel laureate Mohamed ElBaradei. "In big constituencies where you have 40 or 50 candidates running for seats, you will have fragmentation of votes and people with money and influence can basically buy votes," Dawoud added. "They could win constituencies with a very small number votes considering what we expect of the relative turnout." With voters weary of the political process, Dawoud expects turnout to be low A politically wary populace To make matters worse, Dawoud said Egyptians had grown tired of the political process in the aftermath of the 2011 revolution and that a state of apathy had taken over among many voters. "Especially young people do not feel that we are about to witness true diverse elections in which people are competing against each other over programs or over ideas and legislation," said Dawoud, adding that he expected low voter turnout. "Most young people that I speak to have this impression that the results are known in advance in terms of having the parliament that's mostly in support of president Sisi." While in many ways the new parliament may resemble past parliaments under Mubarak, with the absence of the National Democratic Party, the former autocrat's ruling party, there will likely be a very weak party structure in the new parliament, according to Nathan J. Brown, a scholar of Middle Eastern law and politics at George Washington University and expert on Egypt. No real opposition "In the entire Mubarak era, except arguably in the final parliament there were viable opposition movements that were represented," said Brown. "This parliament…you can point to some independent figures…you can point to ideological tendencies that might be rivals with each other, but there's nobody in there that would really pose as opposition." The Muslim Brotherhood, which dominated elections following the 2011 elections before being ousted from power by the army, has now been branded a terrorist organization and its members banned from participating in elections. The party that came in second to the Muslim Brotherhood, the ultraconservative Salafi Nour party, has struggled to survive. Its standing among previous supporters has not yet been put to the test after supporting the military's ouster of Morsi. It was the only Islamist group to back the coup and associate with a government that led a bloody crackdown on fellow Islamists. Permalink http://p.dw.com/p/1Gp9A Amr Farouk, chairman assistant of foreign affairs of the Salafi Nour party said they did not expect to win as many seats as in the previous parliament, but added that it was because they were fielding fewer candidates and contesting fewer seats. "We need…representatives from all parties, that's why we are not running for 100 percent of seats," said Farouk, believing their success rested on convincing Egyptians they sought to share power. "I think a successful measurement of the Nour party is to have a good candidate who can really translate the dream of Egyptians into reality." Government's parliamentary safety valve How the el-Sissi's government will see as the role of the parliament or how the president chooses to use it also remains uncertain. "The whole process of getting to this point has been messy and unorganized, which gives the impression that [the parliament is] not that important," said Amy Hawthorne, deputy director for research at POMED and who formerly served in the US State Department focusing on the Egyptian transition. Hawthorne said the new parliament could end up playing any number of possible roles, including a political cover for an authoritarian government. "I think always there is a role in authoritarian systems for parliament and it has very much played its role Egypt in the past, as kind of a bit of a safety valve," said Hawthorne. "Even though true oppositional voices are excluded from this process, the parliament will be a way for all these people to…in a way that lets out a little bit of steam." Whatever its role is to be, Dawoud said his coalition will continue to participate in Egypt's political debate in the hopes of future change. "At the end of the day … we are … under siege by the media, we are being attacked day and night for being people who supported the January 25th revolution," said Dawoud. "I don't think we should omit the chance to show our ideas, and state and engage directly with the people."


Egypt's economy locked in crisis Projects have been shelved, field workers are in danger, damaged infrastructure - the Egyptian economy is about to default after almost two years of unrest and violence.


Mubarak's release: Final defeat for the forces of Egypt's revolution? The acquittal of Hosni Mubarak stirred up Egypt like no other incident in 2014. After this new setback to the revolution, people have become increasingly demoralized. DW correspondent Khalid El Kaoutit in Cairo. "Do you know why we Egyptians started the revolution?," I was asked by Ali, an Egyptian activist whose name has been changed for this story. Without waiting for my reply, he answered: "Because we wanted to have the 'Mubarak' metro station's name changed to 'The Martyrs…" This happened briefly after Hosni Mubarak's acquittal at the end of November. We were sitting in a café close to Tahrir Square. Ali tried to make fun of the former dictator's triumph but neither he nor I felt like laughing. For this verdict marks a new - and bitter - turning point for Egypt, almost three-and-a-half years after the revolution.  DW correspondent Khalid El Kaoutit Situation exacerbated During the winter of 2011, at the height of the revolution, Ali was one of those who took to the streets, putting his life on the line calling for freedom, democracy and social justice. The young man saw people dying on Tahrir Square. He was arrested twice in 2012. I don't want to use his real name because he and other activists are in even more danger since president Abdel Fattah al-Sissi came to power. Some of Ali's friends are currently imprisoned. "The situation is much worse than under Mubarak," Ali says. "Mind you, the martyrs did receive their metro station." Ali resorts to a grim sense of humor to vent his disappointment. Above all, his remark is a reflection of the helplessness of young revolutionaries in Egypt. Ali and his friends are powerless. They lost their power which they had displayed on the streets. Nowadays, state security forces are in control of those streets, cracking down on every major demonstration or preventing them from taking place. On November 29th, several thousand people spontaneously gathered close to Tahrir Square in the wake of Mubarak's acquittal, in order to protest against the verdict. This was the largest gathering of people since the overthrow of former President Mohammed Morsi at the end of June 2013. I was there, too, to get an idea of the situation. The official response came swiftly. Without warning and without securing escape routes, Police fired tear gas grenades into the crowd. Some of them even used live ammunition. While escaping, I could see that several protesters had fallen to the ground unconsciously, knocked out by tear gas. According to the authorities two people died that night, and at least fifteen were wounded. The work of foreign journalists is monitored closely by the Egyptian authorities Civil society choked Like many other similar incidents, this escalation of violence was not investigated by the authorities, and those responsible were not brought to justice. There is no doubt that the Egyptian state relies on violence and repression. Ali got this message, too. He has been working as a lawyer for an NGO which repeatedly put the finger on human rights violations in Egypt and defended numerous critics of the regime in court. However, Ali will soon lose his job because his organization has to close down. Community work was a result of the 2011 revolution, Ali says: it had established a platform for fighting for democracy and human rights and keeping tabs on the government. Like Ali, many other democracy activists worked for NGOs in the wake of the revolution. "But this is now a thing oft he past," he says. "The government wants to be in full control." Many NGOs are financed from abroad, but this is viewed by the rulers as meddling with Egypt's internal affairs, the young lawyer says. Critical reporting unwelcome Mubarak (on stretcher) was acquitted on November 29 "Meddling with Egypt's internal affairs" - that's how authorities categorize the work of foreign journalists. Several were visited by security forces, others were advised not to produce "negative" coverage, including interviews with people opposed to the regime, criticizing the judicial system or reporting on poverty and social inequality. Filming in public places is not allowed, unless journalists - in addition to the usual accreditation - get a filming permit issued by the Interior Ministry. But even this does not guarantee work without interruptions: On numerous occasions, I was taken away and questioned by masked and armed police officers. "This 'meddling' is just an excuse," Ali believes, because criticism from local media is just as undesirable: "By contrast, media loyal to the regime may freely advertise al-Sissi's policies." Ali has lost all hope - he would very much like to leave the country. "But where should I go? You can't go anywhere with an Egyptian passport," he says, gloomily. The countries he would like to go to require a visa, regulations for which are very strict, except in Turkey and Lebanon - normally. Now, however, in order to enter these two countries, one needs a special permit issued by the Egyptian authorities - the same authorities Ali prefers to steer clear of.


Egyptian revolution film premieres in Venice The film from Ibrahim Batout, "Winter of Discontent," starring Amr Waked, Salah al Hanafy and Farah Youssef, was created during the revolution in Egypt. Now the film is due to premiere at the Venice Film Festival. "We worked under very precarious circumstances," says young Egyptian actor Amr Waked. "The revolution was in full swing, everything was a mess; people were everywhere. But we wanted to be inspired by the events. We used the creative energy unleashed by the revolution." His blue eyes sparkle and his words sound well considered. "The energy was so enormous that we simply had to listen to it. We were driven by it." On February 10, 2011, just one day prior to Hosni Mubarak's resignation as president of Egypt, the crew began filming in Tahrir Square, where the largest demonstrations against the regime took place in the winter of 2011. It was the stage of the revolution - the perfect place to record the first scenes of the film "Winter of Discontent." Farah Youssef (left) plays a young TV reporter caught in the state propaganda machine Low budget The team was pulled into the maelstrom of the revolution. "We thought that we would be guided and should begin filming. We knew what we wanted to communicate," remembers Waked. Filmmaker Ibrahim El-Batout, director of "Ain Shams" ("Eye of the Sun"), had a vague idea in mind, which was realized through the creativity and improvisational efforts of the team. There was no script and very little money. "We knew that we didn't need a gigantic budget in order to produce something which people would appreciate," said Salah al Hanafy, who not only played the role of an ice-cold member of the Egyptian security forces, but also produced the film. It was the first time that al Hanafy had stood before the camera. A political activist played by Amr Waked (pictured) is arrested and tortured by state security forces Troubled landscape The film's panoramic shots are slow; the images linger. The actors had enough time to play their characters with intensity. Farah Youssef plays a young TV reporter who angrily breaks free from the state propaganda machine which had dominated Egypt's media landscape under the Mubarak regime. For several minutes in the film, she sheds tears of desperation and fury at herself and the system. She is the girlfriend of Amr (played by Amr Waked), a political activist who, because of his activities, is arrested and tortured by the state security forces. During a police interrogation, he meets Adel (Salah al Hanafy), a member of the state security forces, who out of love for his country, does not shy away from humiliating and torturing his fellow citizens. As revolution breaks out across Egypt, the three protagonists find their way back to their values - the good as well as the bad. Birth of an art form The premiere of "Winter of Discontent" will be celebrated in early September at the Venice International Film Festival, which is in its 69th edition this year. The Egyptian film team portrays a country which has changed not only politically, but also culturally. "The revolution was the birth of a new art form," said Salah al Hanafy. "It is the energy from Tahrir Platz which is like a massive generator for the country." "Artists assumed a very active role. Naturally we're all worried about developments to come. However, we're celebrating the new creative freedom," Amr Waked added. Salah al Hanafy and Amr Waked knew each other as schoolchildren and as university students. Many years later, at a chance meeting at a restaurant in Cairo, the two vowed to find success together in the Egyptian film industry - something they've now achieved with "Winter of Discontent." The three protagonists find their way back to their values - the good as well as the bad Reawakening in Egypt Now they are rebelling against the ailing structures of the industry. "Most producers have a lot of money," al Hanafy said. "These people work very differently to us. Films are money-machines to them. They have no passion. In contrast, we come from the grassroots. It's clear to us what the people want: They love cinema." With their invitation to Italy the film has been brought to international attention. The festival is one of the most prestigious in the industry. "The screening in Venice is a mark of quality. It gives us the energy to carry on with what we believe in: The good low-budget film," continued the 40-year-old. "It's about having a good idea. It's our first feature film that we always dreamed of with our company ZAD Communication and Production. Many people thought that the film industry in Egypt was dead," he said. "But it isn't. We had a revolution; Egyptians have awoken."


Egypt's April 6 movement bloodied but unbowed The crackdown by Egyptian authorities on the April 6 movement that spearheaded the 2011 revolution has made life even more difficult for the group. However, its members are not about to give up. As she sits in a café in central Cairo with her 13-year-old daughter, Amal Sharaf recalls her time protesting against four Egyptian regimes. As the co-founder of the April 6 Movement, the youth group that helped spearhead the country's 2011 revolution, she protested against Hosni Mubarak, was briefly detained during the 18 day revolution, and her friends were persecuted under Mohammed Morsi, some were even killed. But never, she said, have things been as difficult as they are now. "Under military rule after Mubarak, we were called traitors, but people were against military rule then," she told DW. "Now, we are called traitors, we are killed, put in jail and our group banned, but the people support the military. People are brainwashed, not everyone, but I've lost hope." Since the July 3 overthrow of Morsi, protests have been banned, thousands killed, at least 16,000 political dissidents behind bars, and secular democracy activists say the counter revolution is now in full force. But after three years of unrest and many Egyptians fatigued with protest, it is a crackdown that is proceeding with apathy, and often enthusiasm, from the public. Cancelling the revolution Last week, a Cairo court ruled in favor of banning the activities of the April 6 movement and ordered the closure the headquarters. The group was found guilty of conspiring with foreign powers and distorting the image of Egypt, charges they deny. "They are trying to cancel the revolution," said Amr Ali, the group's spokesman in an interview with DW. Many of the group's members, including their founders Ahmed Maher and Mohamed Adel, have been jailed under a controversial protest law passed last November that bans protests without prior state permission and allows police and military to use excessive and lethal force, a law the government, who was brought to power after mass street protests, says it is necessary after the onslaught of terrorist attacks. Rights groups have called it draconian and in violation of international law. "The leadership was already in jail and their ability to organize seems to have been impeded. So they have been a bit sidelined already," said Nathan J. Brown, a scholar of Middle Eastern law and politics at George Washington University. "But the real question is whether the ruling will be enforced and if so, how." While the group has headquarters, leaders say they are rarely used and instead, youth members come together at cafes across the country to socialize and discuss politics. With the group neither an NGO nor a political party, there are no laws regulating their activities. The court's decision to ban the group was based on evidence from leaked conversations of activists. According to Brown is in clear violation of the law and the fact that the court would act on such evidence while there is no sign of any prosecution for the leak speaks volumes. "It is difficult to believe anybody other than the security services taped and leaked those conversations," he told DW. Out for revenge The movement which advocates nonviolence has been critical of police abuses under Mubarak, Morsi and the new military-backed regime, something that has earned the group the enmity of security forces. Now, activists say security forces angry at the January 25 revolution are out for revenge and acting with no restraint. Amal Sharaf is worried about her movement's future "There are no longer red lines," said Sharaf, who for the first time fears for her group's members. In recent weeks, secular activists have sought to revive their fight and last week an all-female sit-in was called for at the Presidential Palace in Cairo by the wife of Ahmed Douma, another prominent activist jailed under the protests law, but only a handful of activists were present. On Saturday, a larger rally was called by nine pro-revolution political forces, and although numbers were higher, the march passed without much notice. "People have been extremely terrified and don't want to protest anymore," said Menna ElShishini, a 20 year-old student at the American University of Paris and an independent protester who took part in the female sit-in last week. "But you can see the current of people realizing that nothing is changing and the fact that we took the step to have a sit in at the presidential palace was a big step. The biggest challenge is getting people to change their minds," she said. Tired of protests? But while secular activists and revolutionary groups say they will continue their fight, many Egyptians have grown exhausted of three years of unrest and an economy in shambles. "We are so tired of protests. If you want to protest, fine, but don't stop others from working," said Ali Gabreel, who owns a tourist shop on a run-down alley off Cairo's Tahrir Square. On his phone, he shows photos of the sparkling glass displays at his former store in a more upscale neighborhood of Cairo that he was forced to move from because he could no longer afford rent when business plummeted after the 2011 revolution. He now spends his days sitting in front of his shop desperate for tourists to pass. "We have no money, no business, no income, I can't pay my rent and I have kids," said Gabreel, who supported the 2011 revolution. "We have to change our minds, our mentality, not just sit and protest." And some critics say revolutionaries do little more than take to the streets to revolt and have offered no political alternative. As protest fatigue has led to public apathy when it comes to supporting activists and revolutionary groups, many are even cheering on the violent crackdown. At protests, it has become common for bystanders to violently attack. Ahmad Abdallah says the fight will continue Sitting at an open air café along the Nile, Ahmad Abdallah, one of the current leaders of the April 6 Movement, dismissed the idea that they are the cause the instability that has wreacked havoc on the country for the past three years. "Stability is not brought by weapons," he told DW. Following the 2011 revolution, Abdallah was charged with burning the headquarters of former presidential candidate Ahmed Shafiq, in a case that rights groups widely denounced as politically motivated. With insufficient evidence, the case was closed but later reopened under Morsi. In November under the current military backed regime, Abdallah was handed a one-year suspended sentence. But despite what they say has been the harshest crackdown and challenge to the revolution yet, activists say they will continue. "The revolution came from the demands of the people against poverty, corruption, ignorance, and for human rights," said Abdallah. "These things are still there, so no one can conquer the revolution."


Egypt's media landscape not black and white The trial of the Al Jazeera journalists in Egypt has drawn the world's attention to the desperate situation for reporters working in the country. But the attitude among Egyptian journalists is complex. In the ON-TV Academy, where the next generation of Egyptian TV journalists are being trained, there is a glass display case with a sign on it that says "Clashes Museum." It contains three shelves of dusty and broken TV cameras and microphones that the academy's tyro reporters brought back from the many protests that have raged in Cairo since the 2011 revolution. These aren't easy times for journalists in Egypt. The Press Emblem Campaign (PEC) has put the country seventh on its list of most dangerous places for journalists to work, while the latest World Press Freedom Index, published by Reporters Without Borders, ranked Egypt 159th out of 180 countries in the world. The organization says that five journalists have been killed, and at least 80 detained since the new regime took over from toppled President Mohammed Morsi on July 3 last year. The 'Clashes Museum' at ON-TV Academy displays cameras broken in Egypt's unrest Recently, international attention has been attracted by the trial of 20 journalists, mostly from the Al Jazeera network, who were arrested in December and charged with a litany of offenses from smearing Egypt's reputation to aiding terrorists. They have been kept in desperately inhumane conditions without trial for more than two months now. The case provoked a major campaign from international human rights groups last week, but the protests in Egypt were more muted, and not only because of the heavy crackdown on journalists in the country. Egyptians, it turns out, have a different view of Al Jazeera than their foreign colleagues. "As a media person, I would say for sure Al Jazeera are aligned with the Muslim Brotherhood," said ON-TV's Haitham Sawy. "There's no doubt about it." Al Jazeera propaganda? Even journalists openly critical of the current Egyptian government and the impending presidency of Abdel-Fattah el-Sissi criticized Al Jazeera's coverage following the ouster of Morsi. The Qatari-based channel - especially its Arabic network and its Egyptian offshoot, which has been banned - is dismissed by many in Egypt (and in many Gulf States) as a stooge to the Muslim Brotherhood, which is considered responsible for terrorist attacks. The detention of the Al Jazeera journalist sparked an international outcry Mahmoud Salem, satirical commentator at English-language paper the Egypt Daily News, is a friend of Mohamed Fahmy, one of the Al Jazeera journalists on trial. "Before he was arrested I talked to him many times, telling him to quit," he told DW. "I talked to many of my journalist friends, and I asked them, 'do you consider Al Jazeera journalism?' and they all said, to various degrees, 'No.' I asked them, 'Would you work for Al Jazeera, and they said, 'No, because if you do a story it's not going to have as much credibility as it would on any other channel.'" Sawy also said that Al Jazeera's reputation dropped dramatically after, so he claims, the channel showed images of anti-Morsi demonstrations as if they were pro-Morsi demonstrations. "I used to like Al Jazeera International. We used to chant their name on Tahrir," he said. "I had good friends there, but now, no - because they are not reflecting the truth. And the people in the streets right now hate Al Jazeera a lot. A lot of my friends in the media are refusing offers from Al Jazeera." Dangerous job This was why, according to Salem, the government withdrew Al Jazeera's licences and closed their offices - when the journalists continued working without licences, their arrests were virtually inevitable. None of that excuses the detention and trial though. "They just got scapegoated in a fight between Egypt and Qatar," said Salem. "I don't think they should have been arrested, and the charges against them are totally trumped up. I think they should have been allowed to continue operating - I think if they arrested them for operating illegally they could have simply fined them - they didn't have to accuse of them supporting terrorism. They were an example." Egypt's Trade and Investment Minister Mounir Fakhry Abdel Nour recently admitted to the BBC that arresting the journalists was "The Mistake - 'the' with a capital T," and as Salem points out, the Egyptian government must have recognized how the trial has only harmed its image. Perhaps for this reason, the regime does tolerate some critical voices in the domestic media. Salem's most recent column, for example, is a typically sarcastic mockery of el-Sissi. "This past week has been weird," he told DW. "People have been calling me and saying, 'Oh my God you're so brave,' and I was like, 'What do you mean? I'm just writing what is happening.' And I didn't notice until now that apparently everyone else hasn't been writing what's happening." Salem doesn't see any point in self-censoring his work. "There's no list anywhere that says you can write about this but you can't write about that," he said. "The problem is this: there's no manual. What could you get arrested for writing? That's the point: you don't know." Salem warned his friend to quit working for Al Jazeera This creates fear among journalists, especially those working on stories that the Egyptian military might not like. Muhammad Mansour, a journalist for the Egypt Independent, is currently investigating the killings that took place on Mohamed Mahmoud Street, when snipers picked off protesters - or else blinded them by deliberately aiming at their eyes. "It is very difficult to get anything exposed otherwise you will be taken and any charge, like espionage or attempt to topple the regime, will be easily made up against you and the judiciary will give you a harsh verdict," he told DW in an email. "I fear publishing, but since I write in English, most Egyptians do not read in English and I think the government is uninterested in English-language media. But to be honest, so far, I was not threatened or anything. I think I am lucky." Western bias Meanwhile, there is a certain resentment among Egyptian journalists about the way foreign media represents Egypt. Sawy's pet peeve is foreign correspondents who stay ensconsed in Cairo's affluent suburbs and quote bloggers as sources: "Egyptian society is not represented by two bloggers on Facebook and Twitter," he said. "You have to move. You have to walk in the street, get on the Metro, and ask people - that's your job." The popular view, he maintains, is that el-Sissi is bringing the country much-needed stability - and he insists, despite the crackdown, that press freedom is still better than it was under Mubarak. "Before the revolution, it was a problem to shoot in the streets - even if you had permission and an ID," he said. "I was arrested three times myself. Now you can shoot everywhere - the policemen respect the journalists' documents. Right now, the media is booming in Egypt. We are defending what happened on June 30 [the ouster of Morsi and the Muslim Brotherhood], because we like what happened on June 30." The police and military have cracked down hard on protesters Though the reality is clearly not quite that rosy (Salem speculated that Sawy may only have told DW the above out of fear), the media is obviously trapped in a web of biases. As Mansour puts it, everyone is culpable one way or another: "I do not respect Egyptian media and somehow do not see foreign media able to get connected to people at grass-root levels," he told DW. "Al Jazeera Arabic [as distinct from Al Jazeera International] is like a propaganda machine when they speak about Egypt, taking the side of the Muslim Brotherhood and ignoring the other side. Egyptian media are taking the military take and forget about the other side." Eslam el-Qady, a course coordinator at the ON Academy, thinks the West is just as biased as any other: "The Western media concentrates on some concepts, and the Eastern media concentrates on other concepts. So who is right? There is no objectivity."


Anniversary of Egyptian revolution brings new unrest Egyptians expect large demonstrations Friday, the second anniversary of the country’s revolution. Police clashed Thursday with protesters demonstrating against President Mohamed Morsi and the Islamist-backed government. Protesters tried to dismantle a wall of blocks shutting off a street leading to Tahrir Square, the birthplace of 2011's revolution. The demonstrators also plan to gather in front of the presidential palace, where rallies against Morsi in December descended into deadly clashes with Islamists. In addition to tensions between the Islamist government and a secular political class that helped bring down the regime of Hosni Mubarak in 2011, Egypt faces an economic crisis, with dwindling foreign tourism and investments, the pound dangerously low against the dollar, and a deficit that shows no sign of recovering. ‘Freedom, social justice' Calling for "bread, freedom, social justice" - the slogan from 2011's revolution - the secular opposition has organized mass protests against Morsi and the Muslim Brotherhood, Security forces have prepared for a heavy deployment, an official said, especially in Egypt's second city, Alexandria, The Brotherhood has not officially called its own rallies and will mark the anniversary with a new initiative, "Together we will build Egypt." In a speech on Thursday to mark the birthday of the Prophet Muhammad, Morsi urged "peaceful and civilized" observance of the anniversary. mkg/ipj (AFP, Reuters, dpa)


Egyptians celebrate new president Egyptians gathered again on Tahrir Square to celebrate the announcement of a new president. People danced and sang as former military leader Abdel-Fattah el-Sissi was officially named the country's new leader. It was the announcement people on Egypt's Tahrir Square had been awaiting to hear for hours. "Abdel-Fattah Saeed Hussein Khalil el-Sissi, known as Abdel-Fattah el-Sissi, received 23 million votes," an election official said. The declaration finally makes the former military head Abdel-Fattah el-Sissi the official president of Egypt. The election's result - a foregone conclusion for months - is now reality. A feeling of relief seemed to overcome the people gathered at Tahrir Square Tuesday (03.05.2014). They danced and sang in celebration and held their arms in the air forming a "c" with their hands - the sign for "Sissi." Egypt's new president is traditionally announced at Egypt's largest square, providing a festive atmosphere for the city's people to welcome their new leader. It's also the way now-deposed former President Mohammed Morsi was greeted before taking office. This celebration, however, is different, according to people at Tahrir Square who said there were more young people taking part in the celebration. 'Egypt needs a strong leader' The crowd represents a cross-section of Egyptian society - or at least of the 23 million people who voted for el-Sissi and those who see him as the savior of the nation. Mohammad, one of el-Sissi's supporters who made the trip to Cairo from Mansoura to hear the election results, said life in Egypt will improve under the former military leaders. While admitting that he voted for Morsi in 2012, Mohammad said it was a mistake and that el-Sissi's military background would benefit the country. Mohammad said he regrets having voted for Morsi "Egypt needs a strong leader - not someone like Morsi," he said, holding his hands as if playing with an imaginary video game controller. "Morsi was like a PlayStation with other people controlling him." Mohammed said he also took part in the protests on Tahrir Square that removed dictator Hosni Mubarak from office. Mubarak, another military man, often imprisoned people critical of him. Despite such concerns being issued abroad, Mohammed said he is not concerned el-Sissi will crack down on Egyptians' rights. Pointing to the crowd at Tahrir Square, he said everyone has the right to say what they think without fear. Fear of attacks The square was only half-full on Tuesday night. The heat could have kept people away. That was the reason many people did not vote, according to el-Sissi's campaign team. Turnout for the election, which was unexpectedly extended to include a third day of voting, was just over 47 percent. The military and police were also present on the square in central Cairo out of fear of a possible terrorist attack. Tanks and barbed wire blocked access to the square and people who wanted to attend the election celebration had their pockets searched and were forced to enter Tahrir Square through metal detectors. There was a palpable fear that the hate-filled people at Tahrir Square would seek revenge against former leaders. A common enemy in the Muslim Brotherhood Safaa has nothing but hate for her son's killers Safaa, a woman in a black veil in her 50s, began nearly every sentence with "The Muslim Brotherhood - they're terrorists!" Safaa carried a banner with a photo of her son Amr and the story of how he was killed. The banner said members of the Muslim Brotherhood shot him at Tahrir Square 313 days ago. The Brotherhood had come to the square to attack anyone who didn't adhere to their beliefs. Safaa said she voted for el-Sissi. "Let me tell you, el-Sissi, do not reconcile with the Muslim Brotherhood when it comes to the corpses of our sons and their blood," she said as the people around her nod in agreement. "They are martyrs - they paid for Egypt with their blood." There was a sense of unity on Tahrir Square. The new president would have to confront the Muslim Brotherhood, provide security for the country and improve the struggling economy. How el-Sissi can achieve these goals remains unclear, but the people on Tahrir Square said they don't need an answer tonight. No real alternative The CC stands for el-Sissi and was omnipresent at Tahrir Square's celebration Islam stood noticeably apart from the other people on the square. He was one of very few people not celebrating or waving a flag or wearing an el-Sissi t-shirt. Shaking his head, he said he couldn't believe what his fellow Egyptians were doing. He took part in the 2011 revolution in Cairo and admitted that many mistakes were made. "For many people, the years after the revolution and under Morsi were worse than the era under Mubarak. When people have seen the worst. then a bad situation looks like the better choice to them," he said, referring to Hamdeen Sabahi, who ran against el-Sissi in the election and earned just 775,000 votes, as no real alternative for Egyptians. In all, 96.91 percent of Egyptian voters cast their ballots to put a new strongman in the president's office. A military man who they think will take a hard line - much like Mubarak did at the beginning of his presidency.


'The Egyptian revolution is one of the greatest revolutions in history' Alaa Al Aswany is one of Egypt's leading intellectuals and a vocal supporter of the nation's uprising. He spoke to Deutsche Welle about the revolution's success and the tasks Egypt still faces. The dentist turned blacklisted novelist Alaa Al Aswany rose to fame with his 2002 exploration of post-colonial Egyptian society "The Yacoubian Building." He has been one of the leading voices of the Kifaya ("Enough") opposition movement for years and joined the revolution on Tahrir Square in January and February. Deutsche Welle: One year ago, Hosni Mubarak was still in charge and no one imagined that mass protests could have ended his presidency. But more than nine months later, Egypt's reform process seems to have come to a standstill. Did the protesters fail? Alaa Al Aswany: Of course I believe that the Egyptian revolution achieved a great thing by forcing one of the most terrible dictators Hosni Mubarak to step down. But since then, I don't think we have been on the right track. All the decisions of the SCAF (Editor's note: Supreme Council of the Armed Forces) - the military council - were not to protect the revolution, but on the contrary, the SCAF has shown the tendency to preserve Mubarak's regime. So we have a very unique situation in Egypt now that Mubarak is no longer in power, but the regime of Mubarak is. The elections showed this. Despite fair voting, they are not fair elections. Voting is just one step of the election procedure. Everything was prepared from the beginning by the SCAF and the elections law to push the Muslim Brotherhood to have a majority. For example, the electoral zones were too big so that the revolutionary youth couldn't afford to participate. Or in one electoral zone we discovered that there were 176 employees who are in charge of the elections and these 176 are founding members of the Muslim Brotherhood. I don't think at all that the coming parliament will represent the Egyptian revolution. You can see that in Egypt, the revolution is still in the street. The revolution of the youth doesn't think this will ever be their parliament. So you agree with some analysts who don't think Egypt has experienced a real revolution. They say only a very small segment of the elite groups have been replaced, meaning the inner circle of the Mubarak regime. But the only new power in the power sharing is the Muslim Brotherhood. Would you agree on that? I think these analysts confuse two things: the revolution and the achievement of the revolution. The term revolution is objective, not  an objective. There are two elements to decide if this is a revolution or not: first, the participation of the people. We had more than 20 percent participation in the January revolution. We have more than 20 million people. Second, the aim of the revolution should be the elimination of the old regime. And when I say regime I'm not only talking about political. I'm also talking about the cultural regime, the social regime and the political regime. I believe the Egyptian revolution in this sense was really one of the most typical revolutions by definition in history. I would say the Egyptian revolution was more a revolution than some in Eastern Europe. But the achievement of the revolution is still a long way off. We are talking about nine months here. We're still in the beginning. Still, the Egyptian revolution is one of the greatest revolutions in history - whether the analysts like it or not. What do you think it will take to fulfill the demands of the revolution from January and February? If you compare our revolution to other revolutions you see it takes time. You are eliminating an entire regime and we were not lucky because the military council was not in favor of the revolution. But I am still very optimistic because in the beginning no one could have ever imagined that Mubarak would be forced to step down. We completed the most important and most difficult part of the job, but the revolution is not over. But it is a step ahead because even with these people in the parliament that I don't think are really revolutionary, the Islamic groups, there will at least be no legal position for the SCAF to rule the country.  Hundreds of thousands of people came together in Tahrir Square in February  Do you think the country's powerful military will start playing by democratic and parliamentary rules one of these days? The most powerful element in the Egyptian scene is the revolution itself. Here, I have to differentiate between the army and the military council. The military council is the political authority of the army; it is performing the role of the president and the parliament during the transition. The army is something different. It belongs to the Egyptian people and not to the SCAF. There is very strong pressure from the revolution on the streets. The military council is trying to escape from the pressure, the military council at some point gives in and that's what the revolution was. We had to make pressure in the streets to get it. In your most famous book "The Yacoubian Building" you described Egyptian society as being dominated by corruption and favoritism. What does it take to change this mentality? How can Egypt establish a spirit of solidarity like people said was felt during the revolution on Tahrir Square? The revolution wasn't just in Tahrir Square. It was in every city in Egypt. I believe that whenever you have this revolutionary attitude in the sense that you are willing to die for your freedom then you will have all the positive things coming out: you will be more courageous, more understanding and less judgmental, you will be less racist; you won't ever judge other people according to their social background or religion. I believe that the revolution as a psychological phenomenon is very positive. When you participate in a real revolution - and that was the case with me - you really become a different person, your experiences and feelings. You see attitudes you never imagined you would. I wrote about 'the people' many times before the revolution but it was only in Tahrir Square that I felt what the meaning of the word 'people' is. You live with two million people on the square for three weeks and they feel they are members of one family So you think this Tahrir Square spirit will be kept alive? Absolutely. It still exists in the streets. You saw it during the massacre against the protesters on November 19. You saw how brave these youths were, how brave the young doctors were. Two of them were killed simply because they wanted to express their political point of view. Do you think Egypt's youth will ever back down again? Up till now, they have the upper hand. I believe it's going to stay this way for a long time. Only when you have a revolution in parliament will Tahrir Square become of secondary importance. But because the coming parliament is not revolutionary, I believe that Tahrir Square will keep saying what we should do in Egypt. Interview: Thomas Kohlmann Editor: Sabina Casagrande/Rob Mudge


The sound of the revolution The Egyptian band Eskandrella became part of the unofficial soundtrack to the Arab Spring. Report: Kristin Deasy


Egyptian court clears security officer of torturing detainee to death A former State Security major has been acquitted of torturing a suspect to death in the months leading to the ousting of Hosni Mubarak. The accusations of brutality fueled anger among regime opponents. Major Mohammed Abdel Rahman al-Shemi was convicted to 15 years in 2012 for his treatment of the suspect in a deadly church bombing. The blast, which occurred on New Years Eve 2011, killed at least 20 people in Alexandria. Egypt's highest court has since overturned the verdict and sent Shemi's case to a retrial in which he was cleared. The former security officer was released on Thursday, a judicial official said. The alleged incident, along with other claims of police brutality, helped turn the tide against former Egyptian strongman Hosni Mubarak, who was toppled by a popular uprising four years ago. Mubarak cleared of murder charges In the months leading to the uprising, Abdel Rahman al-Shemi was working in Egyptian State Security. He was also one of the five officers accused of detaining a 32-year old Islamist, suspected of involvement in a suicide attack on an Egyptian church. The suspect's body was returned to his family the next day, showing signs of torture, his relatives said at the time. The clashes which brought down Mubarak claimed some 800 lives during the 18-day revolution. Although the former leader was put to trial over the protesters' deaths, an Egyptian court dismissed murder charges against him and cleared his top aides. Another bloody crackdown The 2011 uprising brought Islamist Mohammed Morsi to power, who was in turn ousted by Egyptian military in 2013. Police, who were widely accused of human rights abuses under Mubarak, have managed to improve in the years since the revolution. However, critics claim that the security forces are once again act with impunity, following the military takeover. The current government, led by former military general Abdel Fattah el-Sisi, stirred international outrage over its crackdown on Morsi's supporters, which killed hundreds and jailed thousands more. Morsi himself was convicted to death in May this year. Paris-based International Federation of Human Rights said that Egyptian security forces have stepped up sexual attacks against detainees since Morsi's was toppled. dj/bw (Reuters, AFP)


How the Arab Spring spawned a ‘green revolution’ The Arab Spring sparked a series of protests across the Mideast not just for political change but also for more environment protection. In countries like Tunisia, citizens are taking action to conserve biodiversity. Ichkeul is the last remaining lake in a chain formerly extending across North Africa. Civil society groups are working with government and international organizations to conserve the rich biodiversity at this heritage site The parks weren’t just hard to access for visitors. Local residents too felt shut out of the negotiations that lay the foundation of the national parks some 20 years ago. As a result, many found themselves grappling with radically altered lives and livelihoods without having been consulted.   "This protected area took a large part of the grazing ground that used to be for the local community," Mahjoub says. "After the revolution, some entered protected areas to say the land had previously belonged to them.”   He adds that the revolution taught people to demand change and involvement, not just in political and social issues but also on the environment front. And, the demands have translated to actual involvement - after January 2011, over 370 non-governmental organizations were created in the field of environment protection alone.   "We are seeing this new era where it is not the public administration spearheading the projects, but civil societies as entities with more flexibility of movement, and physical presence in the ground," Majoub points out.   Activism translating into conservation efforts   It’s still too early to tell whether increased civil society participation has resulted in better protection for the country’s biodiversity.   But there are definitely gains, Mahjoub says, that are not specifically confined to Tunisia. For instance, there is a coordination of efforts into data collection, such as on migratory birds coming to Algeria or Morocco that previously didn't use to, or research into wetlands.   "I think now we have an idea, more precise and more updated about the current environment in our countries,” he said. “What they (civil society) are doing is very useful, because there is a lot of data that would not be available without them.”   Policymakers have also caught up, as evidenced by the newly-adopted Tunisian National Strategy for the Development and Sustainable Management of Forests and Rangelands.   Political instability is bad news for environment   Tunisia may have made some progress on green issues. But anyone who has been following the events of the Arab Spring knows the country is something of an outlier. Elsewhere, such as in Egypt, the revolution outcome has not been as peaceful. As recently as last month, more than 1,000 protestors took to the streets again to protest #link:http://www.dw.de/protests-break-out-in-cairo-following-mubarak-acquittal/a-18102035:charges being dropped against former President Hosni Mubarak# for 239 deaths during Egypt's Arab Spring. Pollution and mismanagement of natural resources on top of social and political injustices prompted Egyptians to take to the streets in protest The Nile River is perhaps the best known biodiversity hotspot in North Africa. It includes highly productive wetland ecosystems, as well as a rich variety of fish, mammal and bird species In the fight for a better future, many in Tunisia included environmental issues in the push for societal change. In other countries, the revolutions turned into a drawn-out, bloody affair, that put the environmental agenda on the back burner, as the countries battled with internal strife.   In Libya for example, "absolutely nothing" is happening by way of biodiversity conservation at all, Klaimi says.   Cross-border efforts have also been difficult to coordinate, as alliances and divisions prove a hurdle. "Going to, say, Dubai is now more difficult for Syrians, Egyptians and Libyans, even as development staff and government officials," she says. "Their participation in workshops, meetings and conferences has also declined."


Egyptians demand Morsi step down in biggest post-revolution protest Hundreds of thousands of people have taken to the streets in Cairo and around Egypt calling for President Mohammed Morsi's resignation. At least five have been killed in clashes between Morsi supporters and opponents. More than 200,000 people crowded Tahrir Square in the capital city on Sunday waving flags and shouting for Morsi to step down. "The people want the fall of the regime!" protesters in Tahrir Square chanted as part of the largest demonstration since Hosni Mubarak's ousting in 2011. Permalink http://p.dw.com/p/18yjL More people gathered in the Mediterranean city of Alexandria, as well as the Nile Delta cities of Mansoura, Tanta and Damanhour. At least five people were killed on Sunday in clashes between Morsi's opponents and supporters in the southern Egyptian cities of Assiut and Beni Sueif, local media reported. Dozens of people were also injured during an attack on the Muslim Brotherhood office in Housh Eissa in the northern Nile Delta. The Brotherhood's national headquarters in a Cairo suburb also came under attack from people hurling petrol bombs and rocks and firing shotguns. At least 400 have been injured nationwide in the past week, according to the Health Ministry, and several killed, including an American university student. Opposition wants Morsi out The opposition is accusing Morsi, Egypt's first freely elected president, of ignoring the goals of the revolution that toppled Mubarak, cracking down on dissent and imposing Islamist values. Morsi has said he will not step down and that street protests cannot overrule the results of a free election. His spokesman, Ihab Fahmi, repeated calls for dialogue with the opposition, saying it is "the only framework through which we can achieve understandings." "I cannot imagine any substitute for dialogue," Fahmi said. The opposition protests have been driven by a group called Tamarod, Arabic for "Rebel." The group has been collecting signatures for months calling for Morsi to step down and demanding that Egypt hold new elections. On Saturday, the group claimed that 22 million people had signed their pledge. In a show of solidarity with the Tamarod activists, at least eight members of Egypt's upper house of parliament, the Shura Council, have resigned from their positions. "We resigned in support of 22 million Egyptians who withdrew their confidence from Morsi," Ihab al-Kharatt, an outgoing deputy, told the AFP news agency. dr/tm (AP, Reuters, AFP, dpa)


Egypt's artists face nuanced challenges in post-revolution climate Following Egypt's 2011 revolution, artists enjoyed a brief moment of unbridled freedom of expression. But as the political establishment shifted, so did the ways they maneuvered in society. After assisting the military in ousting Mohammed Morsi, Egypt's first democratically elected president, the political establishment under the leadership of former military chief, now president, Abdel-Fattah al-Sissi, has continued to violate citizens' rights, according to human rights organizations. However, Egypt's artists and intellectuals express a mélange of hope and fear for the country's future. While some point to change, others say not much has occurred. 'Over romanticized' Samia Mehrez, director of the Center for Translation Studies and professor of Arabic literature at the American University in Cairo, has written extensively on the country's culture wars and post-revolution cultural production. Mehrez told DW that the cultural scene resents the fact that the 2011 uprising is considered its inception. "We have over romanticized the January 2011 moment," she said. "It's not the beginning moment, it is the climatic moment. Things have been building up, not only politically but also culturally." "To think that everything started then is a fallacy. We can actually trace back dissent to 2005, when [ousted longtime leader Hosni] Mubarak was trying to change the constitution to groom his son as his heir." Mehrez added that demonstrations had occurred since 2005 and paved the way for the "performative" moment at Tahrir Square, considered the revolution's epicenter. Asem Tag, also known by his alias $$$TAG$$$, created Vent to offer artists a space to experiment Asem Tag, an electronic music artist and co-founder of Vent, considered downtown Cairo's underground music hub, agreed with Mehrez. While he has been involved in the development of a blossoming independent music scene, he said that he does not see a direct link between its growth and the revolution. "I really can't find a logical or rational link between the revolution and the scene developing. I don't know. Maybe it's just a coincidence that it happened around the same time frame. But I don't really have anything to say about it. I'm just happy it happened," he said. Tag added that while the independent music scene in Egypt has gained more attention in recent years, it nevertheless existed prior to the revolution. New spaces, such as Vent, have emerged offering independent artists and musicians the ability to showcase their talent in an open environment. But the difference between Egypt's public and private spaces has left a gap in artists' ability to freely express themselves. Filmmakers, on the other hand, face some of the starkest challenges in performing their trade. 'All kinds of harassment' In an interview with DW, filmmaker Mohamed Siam, who won best documentary at the 2015 Berlin International Film Festival, noted that the January 2011 uprising was a turning point for documentary filmmaking in Egypt. However, the stakes are high. "I've shot in many different places, including Pakistan and India. But Egypt is one of the most difficult. I face all kinds of harassment. Whether you have permission or legal documents, everyone thinks you have an agenda when you're shooting on the streets," Siam told DW. "And if someone says your from Al-Jazeera, you can be beaten or have everything stolen." Al-Jazeera received significant attention from the Egyptian government after the Qatari news organization was accused of supporting the Muslim Brotherhood, an Islamic-oriented social organization, which was banned in 2013 following Morsi's removal. Independent filmmaker and visual artist Obada Khattab echoed Siam's sentiments. Obada Khattab directed his first documentary "To Cairo With Love" in 2010 "It's very difficult now. It's difficult to gain permission to do a film. You have to go to the police…And for some specific TV channels, because they don't have a good relationship with the government, it's impossible," Khattab said. Khattab made his cinematic debut in 2010, prior to the revolution, with a documentary on a drug dealer's wedding party in the slums of Cairo. A year after his debut, Khattab participated with the protests that brought down Mubarak. But he says a lot has changed since then. "It's not stable for us to do art and film. Or at least to do it in a free way, especially if it's connected or deals with politics," he said. The independent filmmaker was detained without charge in 2012 alongside a French photographer for filming in the streets. Though he was released after 24 hours, he said the reason behind the detention was to create fear. "They meant to scare us more than anything else. And it's the same now…But what we did during the revolution, going down to Tahrir, I'm afraid that I can't do this again. The consequences would be worse today," he said. While artists are facing challenges in Egypt, the environments they operate in are shifting. For many, emerging spaces provide some form of freedom of expression. But due to policing and stringent laws, the streets pose a different issue altogether.


Suppressing the children of Egypt's revolution In Egypt, the police and military are repressing young revolutionaries: Three iconic figures of Mubarak's peaceful overthrow have been imprisoned, and one young activist was shot dead. If Egypt ever had a tragic revolutionary, it would be Bassam Mohsen. The young activist died of his injuries last Saturday (22.12.2013) - the police had shot him in the head and chest. Mohsen's tale started in 2011 when he was just 20 years old: He left his hometown Suez to join the protests against then-President Hosni Mubarak in Cairo. He was among the thousands who demonstrated for democracy and freedom at Tahrir Square, and he also took part in protests after Mubarak stepped down that same year. Bassem lost an eye when a policeman shot him in the face in front of the interior ministry. But that didn't stop him. Fight for democracy In 2012, Mohsen protested against the imprisonment of friends who faced a military tribunal. He was sentenced to two years in prison. But Mohamed Morsi granted him amnesty, and he didn't serve time. Discontent about the political and economic situation in the country grew under the regime of the Muslim Brotherhood, and Mohsen participated in some serious scuffles with Brotherhood supporters. Mohsen joined the Tamarod ("rebellion") movement, becoming its leader in Suez. The movement's petition and mass demonstrations backed up the military's overthrow of Morsi. Since the coup, the military under General Abdel al-Sisi has been ruling in Egypt. It's also been brutally suppressing Muslim Brotherhood uprisings - more than 1,000 people were killed last autumn. The committee formed to draft a new constitution - appointed by the interim government - ratified a new draft to replace the post-revolutionary constitution of 2011. The exact wording of the document became known just a few days ago. It does not draw from Sharia, the most important reference for the former Mubarak constitution. Instead, the new constitution bans religious parties. The military's role remains central and untouchable. Earlier, it was leaked that military trials of civilians will be allowed in certain cases. These events are leading some to question whether Egypt under the military becoming a dictatorship again. The three activists from the April 6 Movement were sentenced to three years in prison Opposing the military Out of concern about the current developments, Mohsen joined his former enemies in the Muslim Brotherhood at a demonstration in Suez on December 20. The police fired several shots at Bassem Mohsem, hitting him in the head and chest. Two days later, he died - at the age of 22. The police denied involvement. His death caused outrage on Twitter. One user wrote, "We've lost a martyr who was brave enough to fight Mubarak, Morsi and the military." A young woman tweeted that a revolution against the oppressors is more necessary than ever. But many Egyptians doubt that the current situation will allow this. Making an example The military's suppression is focusing ever more on the pro-democracy movement. Shortly before Mohsen's death, it became known that the three activists Ahmed Maher, Ahmed and Mohamed Adel were sentenced to three years in prison and slapped with a fine equivalent to 5,300 euros ($7,250). The activists have been accused of participating in illegal demonstrations this past November. It was the first conviction based on the new and controversial law governing assemblies, under which police must expressly grant permission for any demonstration to occur. There was commotion in the courtroom after the verdict was announced. The activists' supporters shouted: "Down with military rule!" The three activists are well known in Egypt - Maher, Douma and Adel are leading figures in the April 6 Youth Movement, which started the protests against Mubarak in January 2011. To many young Egyptians, they stand for a democratic Egypt. "The verdict shows that the military wants to take revenge on the activists and icons of the revolution," said Amr Ali - coordinator of the April 6 Movement - during a press conference. Acquittal for Mubarak's sons Mubarak's sons Gamal and Alaa were acquited of corruption charges Few had expected such a stiff sentence. Gamal Eid, director of the Arabic Network for Human Rights, said in an interview with the New York Times that the verdict is a warning for all democracy activists. The military is trying to tell the population that they should keep calm, Eid was quoted as saying. The military's message was support us or go to jail, Eid said. On Thursday (19.12.2013), a court in Cairo acquitted Gamal and Alaa Mubarak of corruption charges - the sons of the former president have always supported the military. The court also acquitted Ahmed Shafik, the last prime minister under Mubarak's rule.


US concern for Egyptian-American activist rings hollow, say critics The sentencing of Egyptian-American activist Mohammed Soltan to life in prison has drawn condemnation. Critics have accused Washington of putting a strategic alliance with Egypt before human rights. He was once a brawny, American college student who campaigned for President Barack Obama. Today, he's a frail and emaciated prisoner condemned to life in an Egyptian jail. The sentencing of Egyptian-American activist Mohammed Soltan on Saturday to life in prison on a raft of terror-related charges has been condemned by human rights activists and critics of US policy in Egypt, who say the government has failed to hold Egypt accountable for increasingly repressive policies. The ruling came just days after the Obama administration announced the reinstatement of military aid to Egypt, suspended after the deadly crackdown on dissent following the country's 2013 military coup. Arrested at his home in August 2013, days after the bloody dispersal of a protest camp supporting Islamist President Mohammed Morsi, Soltan's case first garnered attention after he began a hunger strike 14 months ago. The protest continues; photos smuggled from prison have shown Soltan gaunt and unconscious, with blood dripping from the corner of his mouth. Badie was sentenced to death on Saturday for inciting violence Judge Mohamed Nagy Shehata delivered the verdict in the absence of all defendants, according to Sara Mohamed, a relative of Soltan in Cairo who was present in court. Some foreign journalists were banned from entering the courtroom. Shehata began the trial, in which he ratified 14 death sentences and handed out life sentences to at least five journalists, by reciting a Quranic verse advocating amputations and crucifixion for outlaws. Among those sentenced to death was Mohammed Badie, leader of the now-outlawed Muslim Brotherhood. US concern rings hollow In a statement following the verdict, the US embassy in Cairo said it remained "gravely concerned" about the 27-year-old dual Egyptian-American citizen and the outcome of his case. "We will continue to monitor his case closely and to provide him with all possible support," the statement read. "His health and wellbeing remain of particular concern and remain a top priority to us." Those words rang hollow for many, coming just days after Obama called Egyptian President Abdel Fattah al-Sissi to inform him that the White House was lifting executive holds that have been in place since October 2013 on the delivery of F-16 aircraft, Harpoon missiles and M1A1 tanks. A White House spokesman also said the military aid will no longer require a so-called "democracy certification" in the legislation sent to Congress. In 2014, Judge Shehata also sentenced Australian journalist Peter Greste and Canadian journalist Mohamed Fahmy to seven years in prison, while their Egyptian colleague Baher Mohammed received 10 years in jail. That verdict was also seen as a humiliating chide to American attempts to moderate Egypt's repressive crackdown on dissent, issued just one day after a meeting between al-Sissi and US Secretary of State John Kerry that signaled that ties with Egypt were moving closer to normalcy. Kerry (left) met with al-Sissi in Cairo last September to reinforce bilateral ties Supporters within the US government of restoring full US military aid to Egypt say upholding the strategic alliance trumps all other concerns in the region. The threat of "Islamic State" militants has engulfed neighboring Libya and continues to wreak havoc in Egypt's Sinai Peninsula, as a regional proxy war intensifies in nearby Yemen. "We encourage the government of Egypt to continue its democratic process, but Egypt is also a strong regional ally," said Representative Mac Thornberry, the Republican chairman of the US House Armed Services Committee, in a statement following the decision to fully restore military aid. "Maintaining that relationship must be a priority for the US." 'Shortsighted and narrow policy' But critics have said that the resumption of military aid, despite the jailing of US citizens and other human rights abuses, appears to show that the government is returning to its old policy of supporting authoritarian regimes in the name of security. "It is a shortsighted and narrow policy that does not advance US interests in a lasting relationship with a stable and successful Egypt," said Tamara Cofman Wittes, Director of the Saban Center for Middle East Policy at the Brookings Institution. She also served as deputy assistant secretary of state for Near Eastern affairs from 2009 to 2012, coordinating US policy on democracy and human rights in the Middle East for the State Department. "The United States has repeatedly shown that in the case of Egypt it will not put bilateral cooperation and especially military and intelligence cooperation at risk for the sake of human rights," said Cofman Wittes. "This case is particularly disturbing, not just because it's another mass trial with severe sentences based on scant evidence, but because it's a US citizen whose crime seems to be that his father is a political opponent of the regime." Soltan's father Salah, a prominent Muslim Brotherhood member, was among the 14 men sentenced to death on Saturday. 'Idealistic youth' with dreams of 'changing the world' Soltan's family and supporters have also criticized the US for not doing enough to help its own citizen. Embassy and government officials have said they have raised the case with Egyptian officials and are doing all they can, but they have been unsuccessful in their attempts to secure Soltan's release on medical grounds. "Mohammed would always say, 'God, it would be so great to see my Egyptian identity enjoy as much privilege and freedom as my American identity has,'" said Hanaa Soltan, Mohammed's sister, speaking with DW in March. "He would always look around at our little cousins in Egypt and wonder what would have become of them if they had had half the opportunities we had had growing up in the US." His sister said he had returned to Egypt after the 2011 revolution with idealistic dreams of helping to build a freer and more just Egypt, describing him as part of Egypt's idealistic youth who dream of changing the world. "He was always very much anti-military rule and anti-police brutality. He didn't have any political affiliations," said Hanaa, who lives near Washington. "I know that he had a lot of issues with the way things were done during Morsi's year, but it was just a matter of taking pride in having been part of a revolution that brought about a system that, if you didn't like a president, you could elect another the next time around, a system where people's choices mattered." 'No evidence against him, there is nothing' Just how much of an impact Soltan's case will have on US-Egyptian relations is debatable. As a foreign media liaison for the pro-Morsi Rabaa al-Adawiya protest camp and the son of prominent Muslim Brotherhood member, others say he has not received significant attention in the US. "Mohammed Soltan has not had a big advocacy campaign behind him, he is not part of a large community and he is associated with the Muslim Brotherhood," said Michele Dunne, a senior associate at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace's Middle East Program and an expert on US policy in Egypt. "I'm not aware that US diplomacy on his behalf has been high profile or high-powered, and he hasn't received the type of attention like Al-Jazeera English journalists." Now, as Soltan's case goes to appeals court, his family, friends and supporters say they will continue fighting for his release. "There is no evidence against him, there is nothing. So the US government needs to continue pressuring Egypt to release him," said Habiba Shebita, a dual Egyptian-American citizen who is friends with Soltan and has been helping to lead the Free Soltan campaign from the US. She hopes the campaign will awaken Americans to the nature of state repression in Egypt. "It's not just Mohammed. His case sheds light on the thousands of other political prisoners languishing in Egypt while we claim to be supporting human rights and democracy," Shebita said. "I just don't see how we can continue to support something that continues to go against our principles and our ideals. It doesn't make sense."


The disillusioned revolutionary youth of Egypt Three years after the fall of the dictator Hosni Mubarak, Egypt's Arab Spring revolutionaries are increasingly frustrated. The fresh presidential election seems to be pushing their dreams even further out of reach. Ali Ghoneim is furious with Egypt's leaders. "They're responsible for the appalling economic situation," he says, and bangs his fist on the table in his little textile workshop. "There's a simple strategy behind it," he continues. "They want people to say, 'Our lives were better during the Mubarak era than they are now.'" He makes a similar accusation about the Egyptian security apparatus. "They're allowing the security situation to deteriorate. That way, they hope people will simply demand more security." More banging on the table. "They want us just to forget all the human rights abuses they perpetrated, both in the Mubarak era and after the revolution." Terrible mistake But Ali Ghoneim can't forget. He has personal experience of the repressive measures taken by the security authorities. Over the past three years he has repeatedly been arrested for taking part in demonstrations. He takes a tablet computer out of his bag and scrolls through photos of different rallies: Tahrir Square in January 2011; protesting civilians being given military trials; and protesting the rule of the Muslim Brotherhood. The euphoria that followed the Egyptian revolution in February 2011 has been replaced by disillusionment and frustration The tablet screen is broken. This piece of equipment prevented a policeman from breaking his arm, he says, and smiles for the first time. "He started beating us violently. Two blows of the stick were aimed at my arm – but they hit the tablet instead." This was at a demonstration outside the presidential palace at the end of November 2012, against the draft constitution drawn up by the Muslim Brotherhood, which aimed to hand more power to the then-president, Mohammed Mursi. When he considers the events of the past three years, he feels sad. His revolution has been stolen several times over. The majority of young men and women who demonstrated with him feel the same way. Little remains of the euphoria that abounded after Mubarak was forced from office in early February 2011. In retrospect, says Ali Ghoneim, the fault lies with the revolutionary youth themselves. He and his fellow rebels should have stayed on in Tahrir Square after Mubarak was toppled "until all our demands were met". He pauses briefly to reflect. "We left the way wide open for the restoration of the Mubarak regime. Either by what remained of it allying with powers that were part of the revolution, or else with the Muslim Brotherhood and other Islamist movements. We really made a terrible mistake." 'Economic dictatorship and the politics of begging' In 2011 they thought they had overthrown the old regime for good. But remnants of it are still in power, says Ghoneim – not least the former field marshal and head of the military, Abdel Fattah el-Sissi, who is the favorite to win the presidential election that has been extended to Wednesday (28.05.2014). The streets of Alexandria are full of el-Sissi election banners The streets of Alexandria, Ghoneim's home town, are full of el-Sissi election banners and posters, put up by rich supporters and business people. Emblazoned with the slogan "Long live Egypt" alongside a picture of a smiling el-Sissi, they are a constant reminder for the activist Ghoneim of the failure of the revolution. He has decided to boycott the election, which he sees as nothing more than a spectacle aimed at boosting Egypt's image abroad. "It's just a ritual, electing a military chief as president," he says. "The aim is to revive and continue the repressive regime, whether it be in order to suppress freedoms or to extend the military's economic power in Egypt." In Ali Ghoneim's eyes, the speeches and interviews el-Sissi has given have simply confirmed this view. Human rights are scarcely mentioned; security and stability are his top priorities. At the same time. he wants to resolve the country's economic problems through massive intervention in the market by the military. If staple goods become expensive, for example, he suggests that the armed forces would offer them at low prices – but would employ civilians to sell them, thus helping to combat high unemployment. And where major investment is required, he expects Egypt's allies, in particular the Gulf states, to help out. "Economic dictatorship and the politics of begging," is Ghoneim's pithy summary of el-Sissi's election program. Activist Ali Ghoneim is frustrated that the revolution failed to achieve its goals Hoping for a constitutional state He picks up a little handsaw and starts cutting up the pieces of checkered material lying on the table. His business is doing well, he says. He employs between 13 and 18 people, depending on the number of orders. Even at work the talk is of politics. "The country is going down the drain, Mr Ali," one of his employees, an older woman, comments as she works. "The Muslim Brotherhood are not good people. But they don't deserve all these reprisals." Ali Ghoneim agrees. "Who knows who will be next in line," he replies. The rattle of the handsaw drowns out their conversation. But Ghoneim is not afraid to fight on for the dreams of the revolution. For the "hope of living in a state that respects the law. And where the people in charge are not those who own tanks or hold a gun. We dream of real freedoms: that everyone should be able freely to express his opinion without the fear of being arrested or beaten."


Egyptians protest new law on demonstrations One month before the presidential elections protests against the government are increasing in Egypt. The activists demand more rights and the release of political prisoners. "Down with military rule," demonstrators shout in downtown Cairo as they march from the opera house to the journalists' union building. But it's a rare sight - since a new law on demonstrations was passed in November last year, few have dared to shout such slogans. The law says that all demonstrations need to be approved by the interior ministry - effectively banning them, the opposition says. Violations of the law can be punished with prison. Opposition leaders are calling their protest a "marathon," even if the march is less than two kilometers. Demands to release political prisoners Three activists announced a hunger strike Around 300 participants clap their hands and shout slogans against the military. They also demand the release of political prisoners. Last week an appeal court confirmed the sentences of activists Ahmad Douma, Ahmad Maher and Mohamed Adel. For many, the last straw. The three activists were sentenced to three years in prison and a 5,000 euro fine for violating the new law. "Revolutionaries are not criminals," shouts 60-year old Oum Ali. She covers her head in a dark blue scarf and wears a black robe and glasses. The current regime is no better than that of authoritarian President Hosni Mubarak, she says. "The demonstration law brings Egypt back to the times before the revolution," Oum Ali shouts into a microphone. "The youth of the revolution is imprisoned." Oum Ali is angry with the interim government and Abdel-Fattah el-Sissi, presidential candidate and former army chief: "We brought the current government to power by demonstrating against the Muslim Brotherhood on June 30, 2013. How is it possible that they can now prohibit demonstrating for our demands?" The current regime draws its legitimacy from last summer's protests against the Brotherhood. It now describes the way it took power as a revolution. Only a few regime critics call the military takeover a coup - and they face arrest for using the word. 'Two sides of one coin' Oum Ali demanding the release of political prisoners That has led to international criticism of the military regime. Rights watchdog Human Rights Watch demanded in a letter to US Foreign Minister John Kerry that the US halt all military aid to Egypt. It says more than 1,000 demonstrators have been killed and 16,000 arrested since the military came to power. Most of the arrested have been accused to be members of the now-outlawed Brotherhood. But there have also been cases in which Christians were arrested on the same charges. People have also been tried twice, once for taking part in demonstrations against the Brotherhood and a second time for membership in the Brotherhood. This arbitrariness makes the marchers even angrier. By now they have reached the musicians' union headquarters. They carry pictures of political prisoners and banners denouncing the demonstration law. They feel betrayed by the military, which they say is ignoring the demands of the 2011 revolution that deposed Mubarak, and is acting in the same way his government did. Oum Ali took part in the demonstrations in 2011 and says she does not notice any improvement. She says that Egypt is far away from the revolution's goals: freedom, social justice and human dignity for all citizens. "Unfortunately we have been set back three years. We sacrificed the blood of our children," she said. "We overthrew Mohamed Mursi because he wanted to restrict or freedom. And then Sissi's regime came to power. He restricts our freedom even more and uses the Brotherhood as a scapegoat. The Brotherhood and the military are two sides of the same coin!" More protests announced Around 300 people took part in a 'marathon' protest The marathon was just the first step, says Mervat Moussa, who took part. She describes herself as "a normal Egyptian woman." "We want the abolition of the demonstration law," she says, adding that the law was only implemented to silence the activists. "These people were arrested under the emergency law and then sentenced under the penal law," Moussa said. "In this way the government is trying to save its image. If you ask about repression, the government can say it doesn't have any political prisoners." She is convinced that the trials were politically motivated. That's why the demonstrators want to continue. "There will be new activities every day," Moussa said. She provided no further details - the only way to make sure that the security forces won't attack her and that the protests remain peaceful. "There are enough people who want to use these activities for their own aims," she said. "We are not the Muslim Brotherhood and we don't belong to any party. We have been independent from the first day of the revolution until today. We will protest as long as there is injustice in Egypt." Ahmad Douma, Ahmad Maher and Mohamad Adel, the three imprisoned activists, have already announced that they will go on hunger strike, saying they want to complete the democratization process and meet the revolution's goals. The government says one of these goals is the presidential elections on May 25 and 26. The former army chief is expected to win.


German investors wait optimistically as Egyptian protests rage While clashes in Cairo between demonstrators and security forces continue to rage, businesses in Egypt are still cautiously optimistic about an economic recovery after the upcoming elections. Despite the dramatic pictures coming out of Cairo of armed security personnel charging protestors in Tahrir Square and some 11 deaths since the latest bout of violence flared on Dec. 16, many business leaders say the country's economic outlook in the mid-term is still fairly positive. Rainer Herret, director of the German-Arab Chamber of Industry and Commerce (AHK), says he is convinced the Egyptian economy will move in a positive direction, if the current economic framework remains intact after the dust settles. "Right now, there are no large-scale investments taking place because investors want to know a few things first," he said. "Will the country in the future have a socialist or liberal government, or will it be one that is religious in nature? Or will it be a mix of all of those?" O  pen for business Only when that becomes clear can an economic recovery get underway, Herret said. But in the short term, some are concerned that the clashes could further undermine the ailing economy, whose growth slumped dramatically earlier this year while its budget deficit has increased. Rainer Herret is director of the German-Arab Chamber of Industry and Commerce Continuing unrest could "increase pressure on vital economic indicators such as currency reserves, foreign direct investment and tourism," Wael Ziada, Cairo-based head of research at EFG-Hermes Holding SAE, told Bloomberg. "The longer such a situation persists, the longer is the recovery." Herret of the AHK expects that recovery to start sometime in the second half of 2012, after parliamentary and presidential elections take place. Until then, companies will continue to keep their operations running as normally as possible. Their track record is good, he added, and even during January and February when hundreds of thousands of protestors took to the streets of Cairo and other cities and swept the government of Hosni Mubarak from power, the 2,200 members of the AHK were largely able to stay in business. "German companies worked pretty much though the entire revolution," Herret said. "When German employees were evacuated, Egyptian workers were able to keep production going." Waiting game Of course, the turmoil did have a negative effect on sales figures, and revenues dropped. But German companies in Egypt are still trying to hang on to their local employees so that they can get back up to full speed once political stability returns, according to Herret. Unlike most Egyptian companies, German firms provide training to their Egyptian employees themselves. The unrest is making investors take a wait-and-see attitude before committing "If would be a bad investment if we let go of people on short notice who had proven themselves to be valuable to the company," he said. While the strategy of companies in Egypt is to largely sit tight and wait for parliamentary elections in January and then the presidential ballot set for June, German firms are taking part in an initiative to create thousands of new jobs in Egypt. Called the "National Employment Pact" and launched in April, the goal is to create 5,000 new jobs, thereby giving 5,000 families a solid economic footing. According to Herret, the German government and industry hope that investing in new jobs will help bring down Egypt's crippling unemployment rate and contribute to both political and economic stability. The jobless rate in Egypt was running at just under 12 percent this summer. Among young people aged 15 to 24, one in four is without a job. The jobs project is supported by the Germany's development and economics ministries, which provide the financing. The AHK in Cairo is offering its know-how in the field of management and Germany's GIZ, which works globally in the field of sustainable development, is in charge of carrying out interviews and training. By the mid-December, 3,800 positions had been advertised and 1,900 employment contracts signed. The green light? One of the AHK's central tasks now is to keep German companies considering investments in Egypt up to date on conditions in the country.  The economy functioned even during the height of the revolution, but is shaky Only a few companies have decided the time is right to move now. One of those is RWE Dea, a subsidiary of energy giant RWE, which is only waiting for the green light for the Egyptian government to start drilling for natural gas in the Nile Delta. AHK chief Herret expects to see momentum after the presidential elections scheduled for June. "A large majority of people want to see the situation calm down again so they can get their lives back in order and get back to work," he said. Despite the ongoing unrest, the Egyptian economy is actually in a good position to rev up its business engine once stability returns, Herret added. Luckily for the country, many of its production facilities were idle only for a short time and even during the most intense phase of the resolution, were spared destruction. Author: Thomas Kohlmann / jam Editor: John Blau


Egyptians still facing hard times two years after the revolution New protests started Friday January 25th, as Egyptians marked the second anniversary of the revolt that toppled President Hosny Mubarak. Many things have changed in the country since then, but still, many people face economic problems, apart from the ongoing violence and political turmoil. Report: Matthias Sailer / Sarah Steffen


Egypt: The Bloggers and the Revolution Three months prior to the Egyptian revolution DW Akademie invited Arab and German bloggers to Cairo to discuss freedom of expression and censorship. "I almost died three times during the uprising," reports Egyptian blogger Eman Hashim. "Now that we have access to the Internet again in Egypt I'm trying to use my 'electronic voice' - my blog - as effectively as possible. I write about the missing activists, for example, and about corruption."  Eman Hashim took part in the 2010 Young Media Summit held in Cairo and organized by DW Akademie and the Deutschland-Zentrum Kairo. The conference focused on the dialogue between young Arab and German bloggers. Before former President Hosni Mubarak's regime was overthrown, Eman Hashim used her blog to write about Egyptian politics and women's rights. "The blogs in Egypt became really important after the government shut down all other ways of expressing one's opinion." A study by the Arabic Network of Human Rights Information (ANHRI) confirms that Egypt has the most active blogging community in the Arab world. Mubarak's regime had tried to intimidate bloggers through arrests and interrogation. Still, even during the Young Media Summit in October 2010, another participant - Egyptian blogger Tarek Amr - felt it was just a matter of time before the drive for freedom left the "virtual" world and sprung over to the "real" one.  He was right. Today Amr says, "During the demonstrations the blogs reported about events that were neglected by the official media. At the same time the blogs and social networks were forums for exchanging ideas about planned campaigns. The Internet became a place where people were mobilized." Eman Hashim Eman Hashim hopes that Egypt will become a freer country where people can express their opinions and fight for their rights. "The media have to become financially and politically independent. Access to the Internet has to be independent so that the government can't shut down any online sites or blogs." Despite many demands that remain open and her country's uncertain future, blogger Hashim says the past several weeks have been the best in her life. "I'm enjoying the freedom we Egyptians have. We all connect with each other as if we’ve always known each other - and that's because we're free."


Egypt court jails three prominent anti-Mubarak activists An Egyptian court has jailed three prominent anti-Mubarak activists for three years for organizing a protest without authorization. They were the first to be sentenced under a new law banning unlicensed rallies. The three leading figures of the 2011 uprising against President Hosni Mubarak were sentenced to three years in prison on Sunday for violating the highly-criticized new law. Ahmed Maher, Ahmed Douma and Mohamed Adel were convicted of rioting and assaulting police during an unlicensed rally against the new legislation last month. Alongside the prison sentence, the men were fined 50,000 Egyptian pounds ($7,100, 5,200 euros). As the verdict was read the three chanted "down with the military regime," news agency MENA reported. Maher is the founder of the April 6 youth movement, one of the groups that used social media to organize against Mubarak. He was nominated for the Novel Peace Prize in 2011. All three are considered symbols of the protest movement. Sunday's verdict was the first under the new law banning unauthorized protests, which was introduced in November. It was also the first against non-Islamist protesters since the overthrow of Islamist President Mohamed Morsi in July. 'Deeply problematic' Egypt's military-backed interim government say the law is designed to bring order to the streets following deadly protests against the ouster of Morsi, but rights activists warn it is an attempt to curtail dissent. Human Rights Watch's Egypt director told news agency AFP Sunday's verdict was an "indication" of what could come in the future. "The verdict is significant because it sits in very much with the pattern that we have seen, particularly in the past three weeks," Heba Morayef said. "This is a standard Mubarak-era tactic to crack down on protests. The verdict is deeply problematic... they [the authorities] are particularly targeting protest leaders." It follows the recent arrest of a number of secular activists, including prominent pro-democracy blogger, Alaa Abdel Fattah. He is in detention awaiting trial for violating the law. ccp/jm (AFP, Reuters, dpa)


Egyptian president pardons protesters Egyptian president Mohammed Morsi has issued a mass pardon to all those arrested or convicted of crimes pertaining to actions "in support of the revolution" that ousted Hosni Mubarak from power. Morsi issued the general amnesty Monday, based on the recommendation of his military trial review committee. It covers citizens facing trial and those already serving jail sentences, except for people convicted of murder. The pardon only applies to people arrested between January 25, 2011 and June 30 of this year, when Morsi took office. Massive protests began on January 25 last year in Cairo's Tahrir Square that forced then-president Mubarak to step down after more than 30 years of dictatorial rule. Activists have said that thousands of civilians ended up in the military court system when Supreme Council of the Armed Forces (SCAF) took control of the country following the fall of Mubarak. The campaign group No to Military Trials estimated at least 5,000 political prisoners were still in jail. Many of those in detention were arrested during protests in the 18 months of SCAF's rule under Field Marshal Hussein Tantawi. The order comes 100 days after Morsi became the first freely elected president of Egypt and first civilian head of state. dr/mz (Reuters, AFP, AP)


Revolution in Egypt, again The celebrations across Egypt following the ousting of President Mohammed Morsi look very much like those in 2011, when Hosni Mubarak had to go. But whether this new revolution is here to stay, is unclear. All day, people were waiting for the end of the ultimatum the army had set for President Mohammed Morsi. Late in the afternoon, hundreds of thousands of anti-Morsi protesters again flocked to Tahrir Square and the presidential palace. The mood, up until then, had been far more tense, but also calmer than in the last few days. "Quiet, be quiet," some of the protesters called out as the defense minister's speech, which many listened to on the radio, began. A few minutes later, the crowds erupted into ear-splitting cries of joy, Tahrir Square turned into a huge party. Fireworks were let off, people hugged each other everwhere, crying tears of joy. "I'm so happy that Egyptians of all classes are here on the square," Sherif, a university professor, told DW. "You could say that we have been freed from the radicals. The Muslim Brotherhood has caused many serious problems." He emphasized that they are all Egyptians, not just Muslims or Christians and that, for at least 7,000 years, they have all been drinking the same water and breathing the same air. All around Sherif, the crowds were jumping. One man was down on his knees thanking God, the man next to him was fighting back the tears. People waved thousands of flags, blowing their whistles and vuvuzelas. A military helicopter circled the square, dropping little Egyptian flags into the crowds who chanted "the people and the military are one." A woman with a headscarf ran to the man next to her and shouted "the young people have freed us a second time!" Uncertain future She was referring to the ousting of Hosni Mubarak in February 2011. But there are still many unknowns now in Egypt. The military, the political opposition, representatives of the Tamarod campaign, the Coptic Church and high-ranking Islamic scholars have agreed that the head of the Supreme Constitutional Court will serve as interim president. But there is no clear timetable and it is unclear what will happen with Morsi. "He needs to go behind bars," Nadir, one of the protesters, told DW. "He has to be charged in a court of law. Many people were killed during his time in office and we won't forget those people." Morsi still has many supporters It's also unclear what will happen with those members of the Muslim Brotherhood still out protesting. For anti-Morsi demonstrators like Nadir, they are finished and should go home. He said the real Egypt was on Tahrir Square. But the danger of violent clashes between the two groups remains for now. How the military deals with the Islamists in the next few days, will decide whether there will be violence or not. The military has already closed several Islamist TV channels and many Islamists are afraid of being arrested or attacked. Many have therefore left the area of the pro-Morsi protests in Cairo's northeast. One of the most important opposition politicians, Hamdien Sabahi told Al-Arabiya that the Muslim Brotherhood should not be excluded or mistreated. But state-owned daily Al-Ahram reports that there were already 300 arrest warrants for members of the Muslim Brotherhood. If substantiated, such fighting talk could make reconciliation nigh on impossible. Many leading figures of the Muslim Brotherhood could not be immediately reached for comment. A spokesman said that Morsi and his advisors were under house arrest in the president's guard's residence. People were celebrating into the small hours But most of the protesters do not care about that at the moment - they praise the defense minister's speech as "well thought through," as one demonstrator called Mohamed, on Tahrir Square tells DW: "He asked all social groups to gather here and talk through all the issues with the military - that's how it should be," Mohamed says. At the moment, many anti-Morsi protesters revel in a bit of schadenfreude with regards to the Islamists. On one of the placards Morsi is being insulted by being called by his mother's name "son of Samia." People are celebrating until the small hours, there are convoys with drivers honking their horns and people constantly setting off fireworks. On Tahrir Square, some hope that the Muslim Brotherhood will not be hunted down. "I don't think anything will happen to them," Mostafa says. "They are our brothers, Egyptians just like us. We were the opposition and we didn't harm them. The new regime should not do so either," he adds. But that is at the very least questionable. Al-Ahram has already reported that Saad Katatni, the chairman of the Freedom and Justic Party of the Muslim Brotherhood, has been arrested.


Egyptians defy military on eve of presidential vote Thousands of Egyptians have taken to the streets to voice their anger over a court decision to dissolve the Islamist-dominated parliament. Islamists hope the weekend's presidential vote will help them retain power. Egyptians in cities across the country staged protests on Friday, proclaiming that military leaders had engineered a coup with the dissolution of parliament. But the Islamist Muslim Brotherhood, which was dealt a heavy blow by the court ruling, pinned its hopes on a big election turnout to get its candidate, Mohammed Morsi, into office. "Isolate the representative of the former regime through the ballot box," a Brotherhood statement said on Friday, referring to Ahmed Shafiq, the last prime minister under ousted leader Hosni Mubarak. Morsi presents himself as the defender of the revolution Morsi, who has portrayed himself as the defender of the revolution, warned against vote fraud, saying that it would cause a "revolution against the criminals."  The ruling military council said it was prepared to stop any disruptions to voting, which will take place Saturday and Sunday.  "Armed Forces troops have been deployed across the republic to secure the runoff process and head off irregularities or rioting that could prevent citizens from voting," it said in a statement.  The Supreme Court decision on Thursday had exacerbated a power struggle between the Brotherhood and former allies of Mubarak. Egyptians see Shafiq as a relic from the old regime The judges, who were appointed by the deposed leader, declared the outcome of the parliament election held early this year as invalid. That effectively erases parliamentary gains made by the Muslim Brotherhood during the country's troubled transition to democracy. In a further setback to the Brotherhood, the court ruled that Shafiq could stand in the runoff presidential election. Public pressure forced Mubarak's departure from office in February last year during what became known as the Arab Spring. On June 2 this year he was sentenced to life in prison for his role in the killing of protestors.  ncy/ipj (Reuters, dpa, AP, AFP)


Youssef: 'I prefer satire with absolutely no borders' Egyptian Satirist Bassem Youssef talked to DW about freedom of speech and how satire can reach enough people to make a difference. DW: Mr. Youssef, you're also a doctor. If we look at the Arab world and we see it as a patient, is it a healthy patient or is it hurting? Bassem Youssef: It is a patient that has been plagued with diseases for the past few decades. This is because of dictatorships, of social pressures, of conservatism that stand in the way of liberating ideas and minds. I think it is a phase that we will surpass, like every single country in the world that had problems like this - even Europe, which is now considered the beacon of freedom. It's had that a difficult time and not very long ago, just in the past century. I am hopeful and I think we will surpass this phase very soon. So you think the Arab Spring was not in vain? No. I always say revolution is not an event, it's a process. A process that takes time. And you cannot heal the illnesses of 60 or 70 years of dictatorships in 18 days. You're from Egypt yourself. How do you view the situation in Egypt regarding the freedom of expression under President al-Sisi? Have you read "1984" by George Orwell? It is basically a George Orwellian fantasy - but it's not even well written. At least "1984" was poetically written. Regarding freedom of expression, what role does satire play for you? I think that satire is a great way to bring people together to speak about freedom of expression. It is more palatable for many people to listen to you that way. People might not listen to a serious, boring, political talk, but they will listen to satire. They will listen to comedy because it brings them together. Do you think satire has borders? No, I prefer satire with absolutely no borders. I think there are no borders in satire, there are borders in the minds of people. You had to leave your country. Is satire helping you to cope with that? I'm doing a different show now in the United States, using satire in a different country, different language, different context. To start all over again at the age of 42 is a challenge and I'm happy to go through this challenge. Would you like to go back to Egypt? Do you miss it? Well, of course. Who doesn't want to go back to his country? But I think it would be a little bit risky. Are you still able somehow to use your influence in Egypt to change Orwell's country toward something that you want it to be? Satire does not change anything. Satire brings more people to the table to discuss certain topics that might not be available for serious discussion. It's the people who actually change the conversation. Satire is a catalyst. Bassem Youssef is an Egyptian satirist and former columnist. He cancelled his weekly satirical TV show, which was also broadcast on DW, in 2014 when the pressure from the Egyptian regime became too much and he had to fear for his safety. Before his TV career, Youssef was a cardiac surgeon. The interview was conducted by Nicolas Martin.


Egyptians fear new-found freedom could be short-lived Despite the arrest of Hosni Mubarak, Egyptians are not convinced that the military is truly committed to allow freedom and fair elections, says the foreign affairs spokeswoman for the Greens in the European Parliament. Franziska Brantner, the foreign policy spokeswoman for the Greens in the European Parliament, travelled to Cairo this week and spoke with various human rights activists, bloggers, the Muslim Brotherhood and government representatives. The interview was conducted during her visit to Egypt. Deutsche Welle: The crisis in Libya has relegated the revolution in Egypt and its aftermath to the sidelines of international news coverage recently. What's the public mood and sentiment on the streets of Cairo now two months after Hosni Mubarak was forced from power? Franziska Brantner: People are very impatient. They have a sense that they have achieved a revolution, but the system has now been replaced by the military. There are still a lot people that are put in jail and many military, but no civilian trials and a lack of transparency. So we have the impression here that people are afraid that things are not really going forward in the sense of a real democracy and people are really getting more and more impatient with the current transitional government that is run by the military. There are people inside and outside of Egypt who were worried all along that except for the ouster of Mubarak, nothing much has changed and nothing much might change in the future in Egypt. With the elections five months away and the military still in charge, they view the ouster of Mubarak as essentially a military coup. Could this analysis turn out to be correct? Some have these fears, but not everybody agrees with this analysis. Some people are saying that outside pressure, for example from the European side, isn't strong enough on increasing transparency, stopping arrests and military trials of civilians. They feel that there might come a situation where they don't have elections in a free climate with free media and free organizations, but where there are again manipulated elections which isn't good enough anymore. There is also the danger that everybody is focusing now on the elections, but not on creating a conducive environment of really free media and freedom of association because the military is of course already starting again to limit these freedoms. Those are I think the main worries of the people here. Mubarak and his sons have been detained for 15 days in order to investigate charges of corruption and attacks against demonstrators. How do Egyptians you have talked to react to the arrest and investigation of Mubarak?  Franziska Brantner People are reacting with caution to the news of the arrest. On the one hand they are happy that authorities are now taking on the case of Mubarak and his clan, but on the other hand they are also afraid that this is only happening because of the pressure from Tahrir Square from last Friday. And that it is not happening again simply because of a good public prosecutor who wants to investigate the charges of human rights violations that have been made by NGOs, but it's again more a sort of stage act in order to satisfy the people and less in order to establish a fair and correct trial where you really collect facts and investigate the issue. So on one hand they are happy, on the other they are afraid that the trial will not be one that enhances democracy, but simply another sign that the military is just trying to pacify the population. During your visit to Cairo you spoke to various activists for women's and human rights, bloggers, but also the Muslim Brotherhood. Of course this is a very small and exclusive sample, but from your sense are Egyptians ready for democracy? I think there is a yearning for freedom of expression and for the general freedom to choose how they want to live. We met a few members of the youth movement of the Muslim Brotherhood and from what we understood there is a lot of debate taking place within the Muslim Brotherhood itself and that there is no unified position yet on the future of the Brotherhood and how it should engage with Egyptian society. We got the impression that especially the young people in the Muslim Brotherhood don't necessarily agree with the old leaders on the very strict positions they have held previously. So we have to be aware that there are discussions and debates happening in every part of society. And what's important is to ensure that this is taking place in a free and open political climate over the next few months. We were really intrigued and impressed to see how open they debated among themselves and to see how just to the small sample of people we talked to there were so many different opinions on all the issues. Do you think that the military and business establishment that arguably profited the most from Mubarak's rule is prepared to allow real and not just cosmetic change? This is one of the major questions. There are of course vested interests and that was another concern many have raised - also in terms of European companies - to what extent there would be bribes and to what extent money would decide the elections in September. That is definitely a topic that needs to be monitored. What role can Europe and the US play to support this nascent democracy and freedom movement in Egypt? I think what's really crucial is that we don't let the current interim regime of the hook. That we don't just take our eyes off of Egypt and turn just to Libya or other hotspots and forget what's happening here. Instead we need to monitor and continue to criticize human rights abuses if they occur. As far as we can support actors here on the ground, I think it is vital that we support them in what they think is important and not that we just approach them with ready-made ideas. In addition, it's also key to allow an exchange of ideas for example by inviting young people to come over to get to know the EU for a week or two, to interact with politicians and officials so they can see how the EU works. So I think there is a lot the EU can do aside from simply sending more money. And finally how do the Egyptians view the situation in neighboring Libya where Moammar Gadhafi is unwilling to give up power and there's a humanitarian crisis with thousands of refugees? A lot of people talk about it and it's a very delicate topic for them. They deeply empathize with the opponents of Gadhafi and they usually welcome the UN resolution. Some of them immediately criticize and attack Germany and ask why did you stay neutral on Gadhafi? But on the other hand when you ask them whether they think Egypt should intervene they say that they have so much internal trouble right now, that they don't think they can play a role outside of Egypt. So there is a mood of we can't help right now, we have too many problems internally. But most of them are rather in favor of the intervention in Libya that is taking place right now. Interview: Michael Knigge Editor: Rob Mudge


Sissi poised for victory as Egyptians vote in presidential election Egyptians have gone to the polls in day one of a two-day election to choose the country's next president. A landslide victory for ex-army chief Abdel-Fattah el-Sissi is widely expected. Polls closed on Monday after a relatively uneventful first day of voting in Egypt's presidential election. It's the country's first presidential vote since the ouster of its first democratically-elected leader, Mohammed Morsi, last July. Morsi's Muslim Brotherhood boycotted Monday's voting, along withthe disillusioned revolutionary youth who fear Sissi will become another autocrat in the mold of longtime strongman Hosni Mubarak, who was overthrown in Egypt's 2011 revolution. 'Writing history' Sissi is expected to handily defeat is leftist rival Hamdeen Sabbahi. The 59-year-old retired field marshal cast his own vote (pictured) minutes after polling stations opened for the country's 53 million eligible voters at 0600 UTC. "The entire world is watching us, how Egyptians are writing history and their future today and tomorrow," Sissi told reporters. "Egyptians must be reassured that tomorrow will be very beautiful and great." Sissi has been regarded as Egypt's de facto leader ever since he orchestrated the coup to topple Morsi in the wake of mass protests against the Islamist president. The country has been struggling with an economic crisis and internal violence in the wake of two significant forced changes of government since Mubarak fled office in February 2011. Crackdown on dissent The presidential election is viewed as a choice between stability and the freedoms promised following Mubarak's removal. Sissi has said "true democracy" would take a couple of decades, and he's indicated that protests disrupting the economy would not be tolerated. He has pledged to eliminate the Brotherhood and has already cracked down heavily on the organization. Human Rights Watch estimates that more than 20,000 political dissidents and Islamists are in detention. Well over 1,000 protesters and security forces have been killed in violent street clashes since Morsi's ouster. Brotherhood boycott The Brotherhood and its allies have called the latest vote "the election of the presidency of blood." The organization on Monday issued a statement saying their boycott of the poll was widely observed. Witnesses and security officials said around 400 Morsi supporters staged a march against the election in the Cairo suburb of Kerdasa, where 14 policemen were killed last August after security forces killed hundreds of Morsi-supporters. Eleven Brotherhood supporters were also arrested in Alexandria when police broke up a protest there. Monitors from the European Union and US-funded Democracy International are observing the election. More than 400,000 members of security forces have been deployed at polling stations nationwide. Polls closed at 1800 UTC Monday and are scheduled to re-open at 0600 UTC Tuesday, with final results expected June 5. The presidential vote will be followed by parliamentary elections later this year. dr/kms (AFP, AP, Reuters, dpa)


Sabahi plays pawn in Egyptian presidential poll To his critics, Hamdeen Sabahi, the sole presidential challenger to Egypt’s former army chief Abdel-Fattah el-Sissi, is a pawn in a sham democracy. But for Sabahi's supporters, his participation is real and important. "I am an Egyptian citizen who loves this country and believes that by its people it will be able to achieve social justice and a free democratic system," said Sabahi on May 8 in a live interview aired on Egyptian private television. In a presidential race dominated by el-Sissi, the military strongman who led the ouster of the country's first democratically elected president Mohamed Morsi, media coverage has been slanted, a violent crackdown on dissent has continued and Sabahi has fought to be taken seriously. As Egyptians take to the polls on this week in a process that has been extended to Wednesday (28.05.2014), many say the presidential elections have underscored a breakdown in political life more than three years after the 2011 revolution. The youngest of 11 children, Sabahi was born in 1954 to a poor family from Baltim, a fishing village in the Nile Delta. His upbringing surrounded by farmers and fishermen was something he says made him deeply aware of the struggles faced by the country's working class and poor. His campaign slogan, "One of Us," draws on his continued ties to this segment of the population. Sabahi became politically active from a young age. As a student at Cairo University, he was president of the student union and made waves when he publicly challenged former president Anwar Sadat in a televised debate. Following his studies, he founded a multitude of political parties. His political activities and activism under both Sadat and his successor Hosni Mubarak put him at odds with the state, and he was arrested a total of 17 times, jailed eight times and tortured once. The Nasser model In 2012, Sabahi surprised many when he came in third in presidential elections with almost five million votes. Much of his support came from young Egyptians drawn to his brand of socialism modeled on the policies of former president Gamal Abdel Nasser, still revered by many in the country today, and his lack of ties to former regimes. This time around, he was also able to assemble an enthusiastic team of young campaigners who say he represents their revolution. "All the people working on the campaign are here because we believe the future needs to be better, and we believe we have to work to make it better, to get organized, to get involved in politics," said 24-year old Ahmed Elenany, a member of the Supreme Election Committee of Sabahi's campaign. According to Elenany, 80-90 percent of those involved in the campaign are young people, half of the 21 members of the Supreme Council are under 30 and the campaign director is 31-years old. Young Egyptians are rallying behind Sabahi Other supporters say Sabahi, who has called for a civilian government where the army does not intervene in politics and who has long opposed the Muslim Brotherhood, is an alternative to the military and Islamist binary. "I'm voting for Sabahi because I see it as an opportunity to show there is a third factor in the political equation, not just the army or Islamists," said Mohamed Soliman, a 23-year old member of the Dostour party, the liberal party founded by Nobel Peace Prize laureate Mohamed El Baradei, which has rallied behind Sabahi in the elections. "He fits for the youth and the middle class that revolted against Morsi and who condemn the current state brutality." Just a sham? But Sabahi, who supported the military overthrow of Morsi, has failed to convince everyone. In order to make the elections appear fair, his critics say a challenger to el-Sissi was needed to make the race resemble something fair and they believe the Nasserist politician is being used to give credibility to charade elections. "[His candidacy] is just to try to show the world that [el-] Sissi is an elected president, but it is all fake. Sabahi doesn't have a chance," added Youssof Sahlen, a student at Cairo's Al-Azhar University and the spokesman of the Students Against the Coup Movement. "We are boycotting because it is a non-democratic system and regime. Democracy was demolished by this regime and we can't give it legitimacy," said Sahlen. In addition, the elections have been overshadowed by a violent crackdown on dissidents and a media slanted toward el-Sissi. A foregone conclusion? "It doesn't matter if [el-] Sissi wins or not. The media is biased, activists are being imprisoned, political groups are being banned. How can he say the elections are fair?" said Ahmad Abdallah, a political activist with the April 6 Youth Movement and the co-founder of the Egyptian Commission for Rights and Freedoms, a group founded after Morsi's ouster and which documents and denounces human rights violations. Unlike this years elections, the 2012 presidential elections included six candidates. In the end, they were deemed largely free and fair by local and international observers. All over? "The 2012 elections were completely open, even chaotic. The results of both rounds were unpredictable. Egyptians had an extremely wide range of candidates to choose from. The 2014 elections are different in every respect," said Nathan J. Brown, a scholar of Middle Eastern law and politics at George Washington University. In 2013, said Brown, there was at least a somewhat spirited debate. "El-Sissi is not campaigning in any traditional sense. He has appeared little in person but only given a few interviews. Those interviews show him confident, in command, and ready to take charge - but also to be very, very short on any details. There is, of course, no reason for him to do so, since he seems assured of victory no matter what he does," Brown said. And on Wednesday more signs that el-Sissi's victory was all but assured came when Egypt's presidential elections commission announced that the former general had won an enormous 94.5 percent of the votes cast by over 300,000 overseas Egyptians in 124 countries. Still, Sabahi and his fervent supporters remained hopeful. "For sure, the state is biased toward el-Sissi, but in order to have a democracy, we have to go to battle, we have to try and grab our rights back, we have the ability to change it," said Elenany. "Every step we take is affecting the future of Egypt whether we win or lose. It's a win-win situation."


In wake of revolution, Egyptian composers dust off their pens The revolution that led to the ouster of Hosni Mubarak has had repercussions throughout Egyptian society, including the music world. But its too early to say just how, one composer told Deutsche Welle. Mohamed Saad Basha is a young Egyptian composer who was in Cairo when weeks of popular protests eventually brought about the fall of the Mubarak government. Deutsche Welle spoke with Basha, who said that despite the societal change, the country's classical music scene remains vibrant - and even more improvement is likely ahead. What has the response been to the Egyptian revolution in classical music circles? Has cultural life there been affected much? Life for classical musicians is stable, and it's basically the same as before. Concerts are being performed - I actually went to a concert last weekend. The Brahms violin and cello concertos. The soloists were Egyptians who have lived in Germany for 20 years and come to Egypt for regular concerts every year. There was a very large audience there in the big hall in the Cairo opera house. But we have so many new plans and projects for composers. We want to have an establishment where composers can write music and present it regularly - in the opera house and in venues throughout the whole country.  Basha's string orchestra plays Western standards at Culturewheel I believe that in post-revolution Egypt the numbers of these projects will increase greatly. How has the revolution affect you personally - affected your music? I founded a string chamber orchestra, the El Sakia String Orchestra, last October. We have a program of baroque, classical and Arab music. My orchestra stopped working for one month during the revolution, from January 25, but we were back on Feb 22. We play at a famous and important cultural center, the El Sawy Culturewheel. There are performances there every day, a running program, on many stages. What is the connection between Western classical music and traditional Egyptian music? In Egypt we have a lot of traditional music, our own rhythms, and structures... These styles - traditional Egyptian music and classical pieces - are not usually combined. But many of our composers have made successful attempts to merge our national instruments into an orchestra and into a formal classical ensemble. Egyptian musicians often study in conservatories, both inside and outside Egypt - a person might go to conservatory in Austria or Germany, Russia or America. We study the classical elements, and we master them. But we have in mind our tradition and our national elements of music. You can hear it on (my 2007 composition "Entizar"). I incorporated an Arabic instrument, the oud. It has Turkish origins. I used an Arabic rhythm and Arabic environment, but with a classical orchestra.  Has the funding situation become less certain since Mubarak was ousted? The country has three large opera houses funded by the Ministry of Culture, and there are national culture centers in every city that have funding for orchestras and bands that make music for the ballet, for the opera, for classical concerts or for Arab music. The government has always been the main source of funding, but some private organizations fund things like my own orchestra. Some of these private funds are Egyptian, and some are joint ventures with international companies like Vodaphone. Or in Germany, the Bertelsmann Foundation, which has its own culture project with Egypt. So do you expect that kind of private funding to increase?  A spate of post-revolution projects are just around the corner, Basha believes  I can't see into the future and don't know what is going to happen politically. After the revolution, so many things in politics have changed or are changing. But I do think that conditions will improve in the near future. Not right now, because there are so many changes in policy. It has affected the economy, culture and everything. But after everything is settled, I think it will be better than before. Was the Egyptian music scene involved in the revolution? I can't really say that was especially the case. But since the revolution, the spirit among many musicians is very much about moving forward. We want to work more for our country. And we can give more to our country. Of course there is always a negative-minded minority. But the majority wants to go forward. Has there been a spike in post-revolution music projects? Celebrations of change, that sort of thing?  After the revolution, the Cairo opera house had so many ceremonies honoring the revolution. So did the Culturewheel (cultural center), for which our orchestra played. There have been many performances of Arabic music and music by Egyptian composers. I didn't get any commissions, but other composers have had requests for new compositions. (On March 20) there was a concert at the Cairo Opera - it was maybe the first concert after the revolution - and there was a piece by the (famous Egyptian) composer Rageh Daoud called "To the Martyrs of the January 25th Revolution." Jennifer Abramsohn interviewed Mohamed Saad Basha    Editor: Rick Fulker


Opinion: Repression is hindering reconciliation Since Mohammed Morsi's presidency came to a violent end in Egypt, the country's military has sought to eliminate the Muslim Brotherhood with brutal means. The military is risking Egypt's future, writes DW's Loay Mudhoon. Once demonstrators and the military had deposed Mohammed Morsi, the first democratically elected president in Egypt's history, a witch hunt began five months ago against members of political Islam's most powerful umbrella organization. The Muslim Brotherhood has now been officially banned in Egypt, and almost all of its leaders in the country have been put behind bars. With the help of the mass media they steer, military leaders had previously sought to portray the Islamists as a creeping danger to Egypt and did all they could to delegitimize the Muslim Brotherhood's role in the January 2011 revolution against the Mubarak regime. Claims have circulated that the Muslim Brothers pursued the revolution with help from Hamas, their Palestinian offshoot organization. Criminal charges have also been leveled at the Muslim Brotherhood's leadership, including inciting riots and ordering murders. Repression as cure-all It should be obvious that the majority of these accusations are trumped up and politically motivated. The response of a number of judges to such cases confirms that. The first judges tasked with handling the trial against the Muslim Brotherhood's spiritual leader, Mohammed Badie, stepped down from the trial in late October, calling it simply too "embarrassing." Harsh verdicts against underage female supporters of the Muslim Brotherhood also provide evidence of the narrow-mindedness and brutality of the selectively operating justice system in post-Morsi Egypt. Five months after Morsi was removed from office, Egypt's legal situation is changing. A new draft of the constitution, worked out by a 50-member commission, has now been completed and is intended to pave the way for another process of transition. Paradoxically, the new constitution still draws heavily on Islam because Sharia law serves as its primary source. More importantly, the constitution provides questionable privileges to the army, cementing the military's role as the true source of power in the Arab world's largest country. No democracy without national reconciliation But the greatest obstacle on Egypt's path to sustainable democratization remains a lack of national reconciliation. If the army's leadership under General el-Sisi believes it can simply repress away a social and religious movement like the Muslim Brotherhood that has been anchored in Egyptian society for 80 years, then they're committing an error of historic dimensions. The powerful pan-Arab leader Gamal Abdel Nasser also failed miserably when he tried a half-century ago to wipe out the organization. The one-sided fixation on pursuing and demonizing the Muslim Brotherhood is blocking the necessary reconciliation and inclusion of all powers on the Nile. In fact, that approach risks "Pakistanizing" Egypt - particularly since nothing has changed when it comes to the socio-economic causes that may provoke new revolts.


The Bobs: Deutsche Welle honors Egyptian blogger Photo blogger Mosa'ab Elshamy from Egypt received the "Best Blog" prize at The Bobs - Best of Online Activism 2014. Deutsche Welle presented the award on June 30 as part of the Global Media Forum in Bonn, Germany. The Bobs 2014: Deutsche Welle honors Egyptian blogger Photo blogger Mosa'ab Elshamy from Egypt received the "Best Blog" prize at The Bobs - Best of Online Activism 2014. Deutsche Welle presented the award on June 30 as part of the Global Media Forum in Bonn, Germany. The Best Blog People's Choice Awardwent to Euromaydan, thelargest and most well-known Facebook community in Ukraine. The jury of the Deutsche Welle's award also handed out other top prizes to bloggers and social media activists from Ukraine, the Palestinian territories, India, Bangladesh as well as a language artist who creatively circumvents Chinese censorship. The overall Best Blog winner of The Bobs' 10th edition, Mosa’ab Elshamy (23), uses Facebook (facebook.com/mosaabelshamy) and other online services to analyze current events in Egypt in an impressive manner. His photos and photo essays, which cover the Egyptian revolution and the 2012 war in Gaza as well as cultural events in his home country, have earned him international recognition. "Mosa'ab Elshamy illustrates in a very impressive way the rifts that exist in Egyptian society," the jury said of his work. "Although we do not all speak Arabic, we can all understand the power of his images." The Bobs other winners The jury's choice for Best Social Activism went to Visualizing Palestine. Run by a team in Ramallah and Beirut, the site's operators have been creating infographics since 2011. The team's work is often used in mainstream media and can be privately shared using a Creative Commons license. The themes of the infographics include controversial topics such as Israel's settlement policy as well as the environment, health care and education issues. "The website breaks down the complex and emotional conflict into understandable pieces and presents visualizations of them," the jury said. Deutsche Welle honors projects in the Best Social Activism category that contribute to strengthening democracy and the promotion of human rights. In the Best Innovation category, the jury awarded its honors to the BanglaBraille.com project from Bangladesh, where more than a million people are blind. There are no suitable textbooks for more than 50,000 children in the country. The creators of BanglaBraille established a platform that provides access to digital and audio books. They also set up a network of engaged volunteers to digitize the books and collect funding for the project. "The project has fundamentally improved the lives of many students in Bangladesh and is fighting against a problem that authorities in the country have criminally neglected," the jury said. A language artist won in the Most Creative and Original category. Word games have a long tradition in the Chinese language that is continued by the person behind weicombo, who refers to himself - translated into English - as King@LeftMiddleRight. Posts to the Weibo.com account are sometimes made up of a single Chinese character. Often slightly altered, the one-character posts present readers with a daily riddle of inferring the point he is looking to get across. The Bobs jury said it represents "a very creative and clever way to get around censorship in China, adding that "his posts are not only political but also entertaining." The Global Media Forum Award went to India's Khabar Lahariya, a weekly, rural newspaper printed in six dialects. Written, printed and delivered by women, the paper focuses on the people and events in northern and northeastern India that otherwise get little attention in the mainstream media. A key source of information for many people, the paper has been running for 12 years and is also available online (www.khabarlahariya.org). "The newspaper is an excellent example of a project that provides access to information in a disadvantaged region," the jury said. The Reporters Without Borders Award went to the Ukrainian project YanukovychLeaks (www.yanukovychleaks.org). Run by a group of journalists, the site publishes documents found in the estate of former Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych after he fled the country to Russia following the Maidan revolution. The people behind the project aim to catalog and report on the massive number of files they were able to save. "It is especially important during times of crisis to support independent journalists and to encourage them to keep up their work despite the dangers they face," said Christian Mihr, head of Reporters Without Borders branch in Germany. The organization partners with Deutsche Welle for this category. Best Blog People's Choice Award goes to Euromaydan In addition to the Jury Awards, Internet users from around the world cast ballots for their favorite nominees in an online poll. People's Choice Awards were handed out in the six multilingual categories as well as each of the contest's 14 languages. Over 70,000 votes were cast. Users chose Euromaydan (www.facebook.com/EuroMaydan), thelargest and most well-known Facebook community in Ukraine, as the winner of the Best Blog People's Choice Award. Founded in November 2013, Euromaydan has played a significant role as a source of information since the protests in Ukraine. The page is an important instrument in relaying information as well as for the protests' coordination and the mobilization of volunteers. All the winners of the People's Choice Awards can be found at www.thebobs.com. Promoting open discourse on digital media Deutsche Welle created The Bobs - Best in Online Activism in 2004 to support the open exchange of ideas and freedom of expression in digital media. Submissions to the contest reflect the wide range of opportunities the blogosphere and other online outlets offer to promote freedom of expression and transparency. The 15-member international jury nominated 154 finalists for the competition from the more than 3,000 websites and online projects submitted to the contest this year. The Bobs' partners Premium partners are Reporters Without Borders and re:publica. Media partners are Lenta.ru, La nacion.com, Somewhere in..., Bdnews.com, Global Voices, Gooya, Terra, ntvmsnbc, MYNET, MEDYATAVA, China Digital Times, hromadske.tv, Mada Masr and webdunia.


Tough questions await Morsi in Germany German political leaders have a host of questions for visiting Egyptian President Mohamed Morsi. The government wants to know how Morsi plans to reduce tensions and hostility in Egypt. Leading Egyptian newspapers give the impression that the revolution has more or less lost sight of its goals. "We dreamed of change," writes Al-Masry Al-Yaum and adds: "Unfortunately, nothing has changed - it is as if the revolution had never happened." An editorial writer at Al-Shuruq offers a similarly sobering assessment. Two years ago, people dreamed of a miracle, the paper says - and this is what the miracle looks like today: "Our children are thrown into prison. The poor get even poorer while the rich, under different names and in new alliances, increase their wealth." Inconvenient questions 'The second anniversary of the revolution was far from peaceful Indeed, the times are difficult in Egypt as the country's President Mohamed Morsi embarks on a visit originally scheduled to stop in to several European capitals this week but then cut back due to unrest at home to just a few hours in Germany. His visit to Germany starting on Wednesday is bound to be filled with his hosts' urgent questions - even if they do understand the difficult situation Egypt finds itself in.  After decades of dictatorship, Egyptians now seek new forms of social cooperation, Ruprecht Polenz, head of the Bundestag Foreign Affairs Committee, told DW. "It would be impudent to expect it to be a completely straightforward process without setbacks." However, German foreign policy experts are uncertain as to where this process might lead. Klaus Brandner, head of the German-Egyptian Group of Parliamentarians, expects the islamization of Egyptian society will increase. Brandner does not expect Egypt to move in the direction of a theocracy, but rather to follow the Turkish model that stipulates a clear separation of state and religion. Traditionally, Egypt is self-confident in religious matters, Brandner told DW, but that "does not mean that conservative-clerical forces alone are responsible for the state's social orientation." Moderate islamization Graffiti in Cairo Ruprecht Polenz urged more plurality among these very forces. It is very unfortunate, the Christian Democratic politician said, that authorities had not succeeded in adopting a constitution that politicians across party lines could have agreed to. Polenz mentioned the difficulty of discerning from the outside the reasons for that failure but added the fact remains that secular forces felt they could not assert themselves against the Muslim Brotherhood and other Islamic groups.  The constitution was finally passed in a referendum, which was not surprising, Polenz said. It is the nature of a referendum to allow only a "yes or no vote" but not to allow for suggestions to change individual articles. Upcoming parliamentary elections are an opportunity for Egypt, Klaus Brandner said: "They offer the chance to advance the process of democratization." A strong parliament is a prerequisite for a country to be a real democracy, not merely a democracy in name. "It is all about social rights, human rights and in particular women's rights, Brandner said. "Without these rights, a successful economy is also impossible." President Morsi heads for Europe and leaves behind a troubled nation. In Berlin, he is sure to face in-depth questions about the unrest in Egypt and what he plans to do about it.


Global Media Forum: How art can make a difference At the international media conference, artists talked about changing societies through rap, graffitit or satire. Participants from Egypt and Syria have moved along revolutions, or provided levity in war-torn countries. Millions of people have died in wars and government crackdowns in Syria, Iraq and Egypt. In Germany, anti-immigrant sentiments against refugees escaping these countries seems to be growing. While these are difficult times, there are beacons of hope - and one of them is art. It could be classical music played for street children plagued by war, a satirist TV program with no respect for incompetent government officials or rap songs that condemn racism - any of these artistic expressions give people hope. "All of us hope to have freedom in our countries," Egyptian artist and muralist Ammar Abo Bakr said at a panel discussion about culture in times of crisis at DW's Global Media Forum (GMF) in Bonn, Germany. "And art is important for that." Affecting change through satire Abo Bakr created this portrait of a revolutionary close to Tahrir Square in Cairo Abo Bakr started drawing and spraying murals in public places across Cairo during the Arab Spring in 2011. He "reported on the revolution by using the city's walls," Kate Müser, DW culture editor and the panel's moderator, said. Informing citizens about what's going on, despite regime attempts to turn them into gullible sheep - that's one thing that art can achieve in difficult environments. Satirist Ahmed al-Basheer, who lost his father and other loved ones in the Iraq war, uses his satiric TV show to reveal to his audience the going-ons of his country's government. Getting the Iraqi audience onboard was no easy feat at first. "'If you make fun of the Iraqi prime minister, you make fun of Iraq,' was one reaction we got," al-Basheer said at the GMF panel. The turning point came when his viewers realized that they could trust him - and that the show was actually affecting change. Some politicians changed their behavior because they were afraid they'd be made fun of in the program, al-Basheer reported. And if you make fun of an Iraqi politician, "it hurts them more than hitting them in the face," according to the comedian. 'I might not come back' Pianist Aeham Ahmed is actually trying to take his audience's mind off of the horror around them - the Palestinian refugee played his piano in the streets of Syria for years. He mixed classical music by Rachmaninoff and other famous composers with Arab folk songs in the midst of a horrible war. Permalink http://p.dw.com/p/1J6rT In the end, the terror and the bombs became too much and Ahmed fled to Germany. He has taken his art along with him and is now playing the piano for Germans. "It wasn't easy. When I went out [in Syria], I told my wife I might not come back, but that I'd do good things," Ahmed remembered. He told her that he didn't fight and just wanted to play his music. While there are no bombs falling from the skies in his new home, he is now struggling with German bureaucracy, an "art form" in itself. So far, Ahmed hasn't managed to bring his wife to Germany, something he admits he is ashamed of. Rapping against racism German rappers Samy Deluxe and Fetsum use their music to fight growing racism against refugees like Ahmed who come to Germany to escape the horrors of war. "Music has the perfect power to build bridges," Fetsum said. Deluxe: Germany is a paradise for freedom of expression Deluxe, whose father is from Sudan, said he was mercilessly teased and discriminated against as a child and a teenager because was different from his all-white peers. Today, he helps out at-risk youth by going into schools and offering hip hop workshops. With his lyrics and with his appearances in talk shows, he's also trying to stem the rise of anti-immigrant feelings, which are perpetuated by parties like the Alternative for Germany (AfD). "People asked whether I was shocked about [the rise of] the AfD," Deluxe said. "But this is nothing new. People act like this whenever they're scared," he believes. No female speakers While the discussion showed how different art forms can influence society in different ways, audience members at the GMF panel found there was one perspective missing. Why were there no female artists on the panel? "In 2016, we shouldn't have this discussion without women," journalist Wanjiku Mwaura said. She moved to Bonn from Kenya in February and said that the contribution of women to history has gone unacknowledged too often already. If organizers hear the complaints, all-male panels might be a thing of a past at the next Global Media Forum - just another way that cultural exchange could change society.


Egyptian court bans Muslim Brotherhood An Egyptian court has banned the Muslim Brotherhood. The move comes as part of a crackdown on the Islamist group in which more than 1,000 members have been arrested. The Cairo court’s ruling specifically banned any activities by the Muslim Brotherhood, which backs ousted Egyptian President Mohammed Morsi, and any affiliated institutions. The court also ordered the seizure of any assets held by the Brotherhood, estimated by the interim military-backed government to have more than a million members. Additionally, judges recommended that Egypt’s caretaker Cabinet form an independent committee to follow up on the implementation of the ruling. "The court bans the activities of the Muslim Brotherhood organization and its nongovernmental organization and all the activities that it participates in and any organization derived from it," presiding judge Mohammed al-Sayed said. After Morsi's July 3 ouster, Muslim Brotherhood followers held numerous mass demonstrations calling for his reinstatement and denouncing the caretaker regime as illegal. In response, the interim authorities have waged violent crackdowns on demonstrators and arrested more than 1,000 members of the Muslim Brotherhood, leading to heightened tensions in Cairo and several other major cities. For decades under various governments, Egypt had banned the Muslim Brotherhood, founded in 1928, though the regime of Hosni Mubarak had largely tolerated the movement. Following Mubarak's ouster in Egypt’s 2011 revolution, the Muslim Brotherhood lanuched its own political faction, the Freedom and Justice Party, which won parliamentary and presidential elections in 2012. It remains unclear whether the court’s ruling will affect that party as well. There were no immediate comments available from the Muslim Brotherhood. mkg/hc (AP, AFP, Reuters, dpa)


Taking stock of Egypt’s revolution Two years after the fall of Hosni Mubarak, the shifting political situation in Egypt remains unsettled. DW sorts through the chaos and answers questions about the most important developments in the country. What does the current state of emergency mean for Egyptians? After riots that left dozens dead, Egyptian President Mohammed Morsi declared a temporary state of emergency in a number of cities in January 2013. For many Egyptians, the emergency measures bring back memories of former president Hosni Mubarak. Mubarak assumed power in 1981 after the assassination of his predecessor, Anwar El Sadat, and consolidated power with the help of emergency legislation that was continually extended up until the end of May 2012 - long after he stepped down. A state of emergency, which the constitution allows in the event of war or catastrophe, restricts civil rights and simultaneously increases the power of security forces. They can, for example, arrest any "suspicious person" without needing grounds for doing so. Both of Mubarak's predecessors, Gamal Abdel Nasser and Anwar El Sadat, also declared states of emergency to ensure their own positions of power. How much power does Mohammed Morsi have? When Mohammed Morsi assumed the office of the Egyptian presidency in June 2012, his authority was still unclear. The new constitution had yet to be prepared. The interim constitution that was valid between March 2011 and December 2012 was shaped in large part by Egypt's Supreme Council of the Armed Forces (SCAF); in the process, the military secured sole supreme command over Egyptian security forces. Morsi also wields tremendous informal power through the Muslim Brotherhood The new Egyptian constitution, which has been in effect since December 26, 2012, also provided the military a degree of independence from the government. The constitution is frequently criticized as "Islamist," because hardly any views of liberal, secular and leftist groups are represented in the document. However, it passed a popular referendum and designated the authority of the president. In reality, Morsi's political reach goes far beyond the powers formally entrusted to him in the office of the president. He is able to leverage his power through the Muslim Brotherhood, which has tremendous influence throughout Egypt. Morsi was a member of the group up until he became president. Many observers presume that Morsi's political decisions were an attempt to help his former party achieve a majority in parliament. How influential is the military? The military is still considered the decisive force in Egypt. Indeed, the refusal of the army to crush the February 2011 protests played a crucial role in the fall of the Mubarak regime. Afterwards, Field Marshall Hussein Tantawi assumed the reigns of power, guiding the political transition until the parliamentary and presidential elections. The newly elected Morsi succeeded in retiring the military leadership from the Mubarak era and installing a new generation of younger generals. A degree of cooperation can be observed between the president and the armed forces, particularly when it comes to maintaining law and order. The military controls an extensive network of companies - including beyond those in the arms industry - and runs a patronage system backed by tremendous financial resources, making it a state within a state. What is the makeup of the parliament? The first free parliamentary elections in Egypt were carried out in winter 2011/2012. Through them, Islamist parties were able to win 70 percent of the seats. The winner of the elections was the Muslim Brotherhood's Freedom and Justice Party - Morsi's former party - which took 37.5 percent of the vote. In a surprisingly good showing, the Salafist Party of the Light took nearly 28 percent of the vote. The Egyptian army is the decisive force in the country Toward the end of June 2012, the Supreme Council of the Armed Forces dissolved parliament again. The rationale? The allocation of seats was unconstitutional. New parliamentary elections are scheduled for spring 2013. What are the demands of the opposition? For decades, the Muslim Brotherhood was the largest and most well organized opposition party in Egypt, even though it was officially banned by the Mubarak regime. Members of the Brotherhood were represented in parliament as independents and had influence, albeit limited, on Egyptian politics. But with the ouster of the Mubarak regime, the Islamist Muslim Brotherhood came to power, and a new opposition developed in response. Split broadly between a neo-Nasserite camp and a liberal camp, the main opposition groups have one thing in common: They advocate the separation of religion and state. Hamdeen Sabahi leads the neo-Nasserites - a leftist movement - while former IAEA chief Mohammed ElBaradei and former Arab League chief Amr Moussa are the most recognizable figures in the liberal camp. These three leading opposition figures have joined forces and formed the National Salvation Front, an umbrella group that opposes the Muslim Brotherhood's growing political power. The former followers of deposed dictator Hosni Mubarak also remain politically active and are benefiting from the growing tension between the Islamist parties and the opposition. “Many demands have not been met,” said Hoda Salah, a German-Egyptian political scientist. “That includes the goals of the revolution: human dignity, the end of the police state and economic reform.” Journalists have been repeatedly beaten and arrested at demonstrations Many Egyptians are frustrated with the developments of the past two years. This frustration has found expression in the streets, with a growing number of violent clashes between opponents of the government and the police since the end of 2012. How has freedom of the press developed? Under Mubarak, freedom of the press was tightly restricted in Egypt. And since the fall of the regime, the situation has actually deteriorated. Egypt ranked 127th out of 178 countries for press freedom in 2010. Two years later, Egypt had fallen to 158th place. “It's a massive restriction of the press when you're beaten to a pulp for reporting on a demonstration,” Christoph Dreyer, with Reporters Without Borders, told DW. Dreyer said that the situation improved slightly in comparison to 2011, but still remained bad. “There were a series of assaults at demonstrations, in which journalists were arrested and their equipment confiscated. The situation is far from being good,” he said. How is the economic situation? The political upheaval in Egypt has pushed the country into an economic and financial crisis. Since the fall of Mubarak, Cairo's foreign currency reserves have sunk from $20 billion (14.6 billion euros) to around $15 billion. A decline in tourism is driving the drop in the country's currency reserves. Many potential visitors have decided they'd rather make a detour around crisis-stricken Egypt. Foreign investors are also staying away. The ruling Muslim Brotherhood has lost the confidence of the business community in recent months - both in the West and in the Gulf states. Only financial support from Qatar has pulled Egypt back from the brink of economic collapse. The value of the Egyptian pound has plummeted compared to the dollar, reaching a record low recently. And poorer Egyptians are the ones being hit the hardest by the economic turmoil with rising grocery prices making life difficult. “Many people have become poorer,” said political scientist Hoda Salah. “The disappointment is big.” The bad economic situation carries with it the potential for new conflicts. How has Egyptian foreign policy changed? Tourism in Egypt has taken a hit due to political uncertainty The relationship between Egypt and Israel has worsened since Morsi came to power. But the Egyptian president has not seriously questioned his country's peace treaty with Israel, despite the unpopularity of the agreement among the Egyptian people. Although the US is closely allied with Israel, Cairo maintains good relations with Washington. America remains one of Egypt's biggest financial donors, giving billions to the country's powerful military. Egypt also receives money from the Gulf monarchies. Qatar has long supported the Muslim Brotherhood both financially and through the media. While the leadership in Doha views the Brotherhood as the leading political force in the countries affected by the Arab Spring, Saudi Arabia has been more critical of the Islamist group. Riyadh is considered the main financial backer of Egypt's Salafists, who are strongly influenced by Saudi Arabia's ultra-conservative Wahhabi sect and are considered competitors of the Muslim Brotherhood. Morsi's Islamist-dominated government now has regular contact with Iran, but an alliance - once feared by some Mideast observers - has not materialized. Cairo and Tehran have found themselves at loggerheads over the fate of embattled Syrian President Bashar Assad. Can Egypt reclaim leadership of the Arab world? Cairowas long considered the center of the Arab world. But in the past two decades, the economic and political influence of the Gulf monarchies has grown at the expense of Egypt, the Arab world's most populous nation with 80 million people. The United Arab Emirates (UAE) has attracted investors and guest workers from all over the world and has turned Dubai into a modern metropolis, where many Egyptians work as well. Qatarhas used its wealth from gas and oil extraction to make a name for itself in the world. For example, the television network Al Jazeera - which has become the leading media outlet in the Arab world - is considered by some observers to be an arm of Qatari foreign policy. In addition, the emir of Qatar has become something of a regional conflict mediator in recent years, a role once played by Egypt. Saudi Arabia, meanwhile, has bought a certain amount of economic and political influence in Egypt by lending Cairo financial support.


Idealistic young Egyptian gets paid back with trial Eager to help her country's transition after the revolution, a young Egyptian lawyer went to work promoting democracy. Now she finds herself on trial. Two years ago, Egypt witnessed the start of an unprecedented uprising, which began as a series of mass demonstrations and ended with the resignation of President Hosni Mubarak. In the aftermath of the uprising, many young Egyptians were eager to help their country transition to democracy. Two years later, they are realizing how difficult that process can be. Though the charges she is facing are serious, there is something faintly ridiculous about the trial of 26-year-old Hafsa Halawa. It is evident in the way she tweets from court using the hashtag "grumpy defendant" and in her good-natured refusal to sit on the floor of the large, mesh cage to which she is confined during trial.  The story of how Halawa went from ambitious, young lawyer, eagerly working to help her country transition to democracy, to defendant number 28 in a high-profile felony trial, illustrates the challenges facing Egypt two years after the largely-peaceful uprising that forced President Hosni Mubarak from power.  A rollercoaster ride  Even those frustrated by the country's bumpy progression toward democracy - and there are now many - would admit that there have been moments of great significance over the past two years. Egypt has held presidential and parliamentary elections, which observers deemed largely fair. A new constitution was approved by popular vote, and though it remains controversial the document includes protections for civil rights and freedom of expression. Halawa's work has been on ice for over a year But after decades of dictatorship, authoritarian values are ingrained in Egypt's judiciary and security forces. And perhaps no one knows that better than the funny, chatty, Halawa who yearned to march in Tahrir Square during the revolution but was forced to remain in England in order to finish graduate school.  "My revolution was on the phone with my parents here, freaking out about them and going to the Egyptian embassy in Britain," she says. But as she finished her law degree, Halawa returned to Egypt, excited to help in the transition to democracy. Her interest in politics lead her to an American non-governmental organization called the National Democratic Institute (NDI), where she got a job helping Egyptian political parties prepare for the country's first free parliamentary elections in November 2011.  "Everyone actually needed help with the same problems," Halawa says. "Even the old guard, when it was disbanded, regrouping in a post-revolution Egypt - it's been proven that it's a whole host of egos and lack of finance and lack of basic understanding. I always joke that this country's elites and its poor are politically illiterate." Hafsa's job included training politicians in how to talk to the media and to their constituents.  Because NDI was working with political parties across the spectrum, from conservative Islamists to the more moderate Muslim Brotherhood to liberals and socialists, Halawa didn't think her job was particularly controversial.  'Israeli spies'  But just a few weeks after the elections, Egyptian security forces raided the offices of more than a dozen NGOs - including NDI - seizing equipment and accusing employees of spying. While preparing for a work meeting in January 2012, Halawa was surrounded by police and army officers. Halawa observed the revolution from afar "They started berating me and heckling me and screaming at me that I had damaged this country, that I was helping the 'Jewish, Israeli spies,' that I was a Zionist," she says. They were particularly infuriated when she showed them her national ID card, which identifies her as an Egyptian citizen.  The charges against the NGO workers were deceptively simple. Several of the organizations had skirted Egypt's byzantine registration system, which requires the approval of a number of government ministries, and which, some believed, was a way for Hosni Mubarak's administration to prevent civil society groups from doing their jobs. Even though NDI had been working in Egypt for years, employees were charged with receiving illegal funds in the form of their salaries.  Locals on trial  Nineteen American citizens were among those charged, and the raid quickly became an international incident, with some in the US Congress suggesting that aid to Egypt should be slashed. But when the Americans were allowed to leave the country - and all but one did - their Egyptian colleagues remained on trial.  And, though she has tried, Halawa is finding it difficult to move on with her life. NGO employees' salaries have been dubbed illegal funds "I'm angry because I've spent the last 13, 14 months now unable to work," Halawa says. "There is a stigma now attached to being from NDI, whereby NGOs refuse to hire me because I am on trial and it would cause problems for them with state security."  The NGO trial was recently postponed until March. Halawa says she's hopeful that she'll be acquitted. She has no regrets that the revolution took place and she believes that Egyptian youth will shepherd their country toward democracy. She just hopes the trial will end soon so she can get back to helping them.


Where the revolution began Birgitta Schülke und Khalid El Kaoutit experience the anger of Egyptians in the run-up to the elections We go back to where the Egyptian revolution started - and find some things haven't changed.


Democracy gets off to peaceful start in Egypt Despite worries of violence, the first election in Egypt since the fall of strongman Hosni Mubarak has so far gone smoothly and has seen a large turnout. A week ago it appeared unthinkable that the parliamentary elections in Egypt on Monday and Tuesday would even take place. Demonstrations quickly turned into bloody clashes with security forces and dozens were killed or injured. By Tuesday evening, polling stations had closed amid general satisfaction that voting had been peaceful and fair. "The people have passed the democracy test," read one headline from the independent daily newspaper Al-Shorouk, as voting came to an end. UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon praised the "generally calm and orderly" election process. A spokesman for the UN leader said that he congratulated the Egyptian people "for their contribution to the overall democratic transformation in North Africa and the Middle East." Egyptian soldiers were out but not violent The hope of free and fair elections - without security troops and fraudulent votes - mobilized more voters than ever before. The numbers of people trying to cast their ballot meant that polling stations had to stay open two hours longer than planned on Monday. Following the bloody clashes of the past days, thousands of soldiers were present, but peace prevailed at Cairo's Tahrir Square and at other opposition gathering-places in the capital. The head of the ruling military council, Hussein Tantawi, was shown on state TV at several polling stations receiving information on how the vote took place. Bloggers were at work reporting during the entire day, with some speaking of individual scenes of violence and attempts to influence voters before they cast their ballot. For Thomas Demmelhuber, Egypt expert at the University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, despite the individual scenes of violence, the election is enormously important, because it "serves as a political vent for pressure that has been building up for over nine months." Questionable agenda The most likely victor is the "Democratic Alliance," an umbrella constellation that comprises eleven parties. The leading voice here is that of the Freedom and Justice Party, the political arm of the Islamist Muslim Brotherhood. In order to distinguish itself from other, more radical parties from the Islamist spectrum, the Muslim Brotherhood has tried to get over to the media a democratic and pluralist position. According to Mohamed Saad Katatni, the secretary general of the Muslim Brotherhood, there are a number of Christian candidates on its election list. Katatni dismissed fears of Christians that they will be repressed if the Muslim Brotherhood takes power. In an interview with Al Jazeera, the Doha-based Arab broadcaster, Katatni blamed the atmosphere of distrust and hatred between Muslims and Christians on the "old regime" of deposed leader Hosni Mubarak.   'Freedom' for Egyptians It is difficult to gain an overview of the political landscape in Egypt. Apart from the Islamists, there is not only a Social Democratic Party, but also a Party for Equality and Development and an Awareness Party. There is also the Egyptian Revolutionary Party, which advertises "revolution" on its election posters, but in actuality was founded by former members of Mubarak's national NDP party and serves to preserve the power of the elite rather than the popular revolution taking place on Tahrir Square. Freedom is the other keyword that is being used by a range of parties. The names of the "Free Egyptians Party," the "Egyptian Freedom Party," or "Free Egypt Party" are almost identical. And many of the new parties which signed up for the election are so underfunded that they will have to struggle to survive the coming year, said political analyst Emad Gad of the Al Ahram Center for Political and Strategic Studies in Cairo. Billionaire's party If any of these new "freedom" parties survives, it will most certainly be the "Free Egyptians Party." The figurehead of the party, founded in April, is the Coptic businessman Naguib Sawiris - who sees his party as the antipode of the "Freedom and Justice Party" of the Muslim Brotherhood. Sawiris' party, with 130,000 members, is seen by observers as financially sound and well organized, and champions itself as the advocate of Western democratic ideals such as human rights and the equality of all Egyptians. Lack of transparency? Over half of Egypt's 85 million people have been called to elect the 498 representatives in Egypt's parliament. The vote will take place in three stages: the residents of Cairo, Alexandria and seven other administrative districts can cast their ballots until Tuesday. Immediately thereafter the results of the direct candidates will be published.  The 2010 Egyptian election was plagued by protests In December and January two further stages will be held in which the residents of Egypt's 18 other provinces will cast their votes. In each stage there is the possibility of a runoff, if no candidate receives an absolute majority. Two-thirds of the seats are reserved for party lists, and the final results of the entire election are expected in mid January. For Thomas Demmelhuber, this election system lacks transparency - and brings back the unpleasant memories of the manipulated vote in 2005. "The Muslim Brotherhood won 88 seats - the majority in the first round of voting. In the remaining rounds, Mubarak's helpers made sure that the Islamists no longer played a role." In 2010, parliamentary elections were held on one single day - so as to comply with changes to the country's constitution made in 2007. This vote, too, was manipulated and widely condemned as fraudulent. Nevertheless, the fact that the ruling military council has returned to the earlier election system has worried many observers, who fear that it will not help on Egypt's road to democracy. Author: Thomas Kohlmann / glb Editor: Michael Lawton


Egyptian filmmakers impacted by political upheaval Egypt's current political situation also has a big impact on the film industy. The recent Cairo International Film Festival was the first to be held after the revolution and became a controversial event. Filmmakers and actors are among Mohamed Mursi’s most vocal critics. Richard Duebel reports from Egypt on the oldest of the Arab World’s cinemas as it faces fresh government censorship.


Sexual violence - the dark side of the revolution This week alone, 91 women became victims of sexual assault over four days during the protests, says Human Rights Watch. Many women are breaking their silence at last. But it's a long battle. On Friday (05.07.2013), violence in Egypt escalated again – nationwide, 30 people were killed and more than 1070 wounded, according to Egypt's Ministry of Health. Supporters and opponents of ousted President Mohammed Morsi continue to fight the battle over their country's future – the vast majority of them are men. Nihal Saad Zaghloul: "My body is mine" "The more we patrol and the more we fight for women's rights the more counteracts there are from harassers and rapists," Nihal Saad Zaghloul explained as the reason why she decided not to go to Tahrir square on Friday night. "It is dangerous." The 27-year-old Egyptian doesn't want to be exposed to the danger again that has been dubbed the ‘dark side of the Egyptian revolution.' She herself became a victim of assault when walking with friends through Tahrir square in 2012. It was a traumatic experience – but she decided to take up the battle. Nihal Saad Zaghloul, an IT programmer, co-founded the group 'Bassma', which means 'imprint'. It's a group whose aim is to raise awareness that sexual harassment has been a part of daily life in Egypt for far too long – and that it has to stop. Gang rapes during demonstrations Human rights groups are alarmed: The number of women who have become victims of brutal assaults during the protests in Egypt has been rising. The women are beaten up or raped, and more often than not several men are involved – some victims say as many as 100 men were present. The assaults can last anywhere from a few minutes to several hours. According to Human Rights Watch, over a period of four days this week, 91 women became victims of sexual harassment during the protests that led to the ousting of President Morsi. And these figures are just the reported cases. In a video Human Rights Watch published this week, Hania Moheeb describes how for her a peaceful demonstration on Tahrir Square turned into a nightmare a few months ago. "They made a very tight circle around me, they started moving their hands all over my body, they touched every inch of my body, and violated every inch of my body. I was so much traumatized I was only screaming at the time." Hundreds of women have gone through similar experiences since the beginning of the uprising – both Egyptians and foreigners. The case of South African CBS correspondent Lara Logan who was reporting about the demonstrations from Tahrir Square in early 2011 first put the topic on the agenda worldwide, when Logan herself became the victim of a brutal gang rape. Culprits are not held accountable Since November 2011, the police have been absent from Tahrir Square during large-scale demonstrations to avoid clashes with protesters. There is no protection for female demonstrators, and men who rape women know that nothing will happen to them. The police will not follow up on their cases, according to Human Rights Watch. The culprits make use of their anonymity in crowded places like Tahrir Square in Cairo It's a vacuum that a few rescue squads have been trying to fill. Volunteers patrol protest areas to provide minimum protection to female demonstrators. But Tahrir Bodyguard and OpAntiSH (Operation Anti-Sexual Harassment), the two biggest groups, on Friday decided to refrain from joining the protest areas – to protect their volunteers, as they said on Twitter. More often than not, the volunteers themselves are wounded on the ground when trying to prevent assaults or evacuate the victims. "It's extremely frustrating and depressing," Nihal Saad Zaghloul told DW. Many activistis from her own group Bassma often join in the patrolling activities organized by Tahrir Bodyguard or OpAntiSH. "But we get a lot of feedback saying it's good what you do. So it is frustrating but it's also a push for us to continue because now we know the problem more and we understand it more every day." Not much attention The problem goes back a long time, said Zaghloul. It partly stems from the oppression in Egypt's society under Mubarak. "It's only natural that if men are oppressed they oppress what they view as weaker, and in this case it is women." It's a vicious circle that has engrained itself deeply in Egyptian society. An increasing number of Egyptian women speak out against violence Under Morsi and the Muslim Brotherhood, nothing changed. General Adel Afifi, a Salafist member of the Shura Council, Egypt's legislative body, said in February 2012: "Women contribute 100-percent in rape because they put themselves in such circumstances." He was referring to cases of female protesters who had been raped. But activist Nihal Saad Zaghloul told DW it was unfair to blame Morsi and Islamists alone for violence against women. "He made a lot of mistakes and he was not paying much attention to women's rights, but none of the previous regimes actually did anything for women's rights." She didn't want to comment on claims that the Muslim Brotherhood had paid thugs to rape and beat up women to deter them from taking part in demonstrations and political life. "There's no proof. I can't make accusations because there's no proof." Get men involved Nihal Saad Zaghloul refuses to play the blame game and instead focuses on awareness campaigns she organizes with her group Bassma. At the moment, Bassma are planning a large-scale campaign with posters in buses, schools and kindergardens informing people about women's rights and why violence against women has to stop. "I see a lot of women standing up everyday, struggling for their rights and not giving it up. Our movement keeps growing. More and more people are rejecting it, and several news outlets are talking about it, which was never the case before," the activist told DW. In her own group Bassma, Nihal Saad Zaghloul finds it important that male activists are involved – in fact, the majority of Bassma are men. "Once you decide to include men and say okay, feminism or defending women's rights is no longer an exclusive right for women then you have a lot of men who want to join in," she said. "They have mothers, they have sisters, and they truly believe that women are human beings." Nihal Saad Zaghloul believes that in Egypt, an important learning process has been kicked off alongside the revolution – with women, but above all with men. And still, she has no illusions: "It takes time. Change takes time."


Mubarak returns to court to face charges for deaths in Egypt's revolution An Egyptian court has resumed the trial of toppled dictator Hosni Mubarak for complicity in the deaths of protesters during Egypt’s 2011 uprising. The defense blames Islamists for violence during Egypt’s revolution. State television broadcast footage of Mubarak arriving in a wheelchair dressed in a jacket, striped shirt and dark sunglasses for his second appearance in the court since his release into house arrest from Cairo's Tora prison last month. The 85-year-old former president faces an array of charges, most notably allegations of complicity in the deaths of about 850 people killed in the uprising against him. The charges carry a maximum penalty of death. Mubarak received a life sentence for the killings last year, but another court overturned the conviction on appeal earlier this year, leading to the current retrial. The former president stands accused of the complicity charges - as well as other allegations including corruption - alongside his two sons, Alaa and Gamal; former Interior Minister Habib al-Adly; and six of his security chiefs. mkg/msh (AFP, AP)


Egyptian economy is a time bomb Businesses in Egypt are having a hard time as the country's currency weakens. That situation, combined with the massive subsidy system threatening to collapse, may be fertile ground for revolts. Wahid Mardenly has been a businessman for many years. He runs a textile factory in a Cairo suburb where 500 employees currently sew clothing for well-known companies, such as C&A;, Zara and Marks & Spencer. The factory is able to accommodate some 3,000 workers, but business isn't doing well at the moment. Just recently, Mardenly lost a contract to a foreign competitor. "The problem is that our clients are concerned about placing orders with us," he noted. "We do business with major companies abroad, but they no longer have confidence in our country. They invest here, too, by sending us the fabrics to sew." Mardenly's employees receive the textiles, buttons and other materials duty-free from their clients in this free trade zone. They sew the items there, and then ship the finished products to Europe and the United States. Mardenly said that since the revolution two years ago, his employees have become more attuned to their rights and demand more money. But what really concerns him is the problematic security situation. His employees, mainly young women, are brought to work by bus, but their parents are worried about them. "They often won't let their daughters leave home. They're afraid the bus could be raided," he said. "That's already happened two or three times. Criminals stopped the bus and demanded money." Security situation and power outages hamper production Businessman Wahid Mardenly During former president Hosni Mubarak's regime, brutal security forces were omnipresent, but following his overthrow, the police disappeared from the streets. Former regime members tried to make the situation in the country as chaotic as possible. On the other hand, many high-level police officers also make no secret that they do not want to support the ruling Muslim Brotherhood. But it's not only safety concerns that make the parents of Mardenly's workers reluctant to send off their daughters. "The Islamists sometimes go to the girls' parents and tell them that they shouldn't go to work because it's against the religion - they say a woman should stay home and be a mother," he noted. But an even more serious problem for businesses are the regular power outages. Very frequently, electricity goes out for up to four hours a day, bringing production to a complete standstill. That has resulted in Mardenly not being able to deliver his clothing products on time, which in turn has caused some of his clients to take their business to Bangladesh and Morocco, where the fabrics are sewn together. Price hikes threaten the country's stability Small businesses suffer the most from the currency crisis This development has caused Egypt to lose not only urgently needed jobs, but also valuable foreign exchange revenues. After all, Mardenly's customers pay in US dollars and euros and Egypt's central bank could desperately use those at the moment to pay for food and fuel imports, as well as the interest for foreign debt. Concerns that Egypt will not be able to shoulder these burdens have sent the Egyptian pound on a downward spiral. Imports have become more expensive as a result. That not only puts strain on Egypt's production companies, it has also led to rising costs in the country. "There's a risk involved when calculations are made in Egyptian pounds," Mardenly explained. "The goods get more expensive by the day because Egyptian textile factories import around 80 percent of their raw products, and those have to be paid for in dollars." The businessman sees a time bomb in these rising prices. About 40 percent of the Egyptian population lives below the poverty line, subsisting on two dollars a day. These people can hardly withstand rising prices. Until now, they have been relatively sheltered from the increasing prices by way of massive subsidies for bread and gas. But the state must buy these subsidized products from abroad at normal prices in dollars or euros. Before the revolution, tourism accounted for 10 percent of Egypt's gross domestic product The devaluation of Egypt's currency has caused the necessary foreign currency reserves to dwindle to a dangerous level. A reduction in the subsidies and higher prices thus seem inevitable. To prevent a revolt, the government has planned to install a kind of voucher system for the country's poorest people, but there are also plenty of "richer" people who would suffer dramatically from such rising costs. For instance, Naima - in her mid-60s, she earns about nine euros a day working as a cleaning lady. "I am the only one in our household who earns money," Naima said. "I clean about three to four days a week, and receive not quite 25 euros of widow's pension." In the best case scenario, she earns about 170 euros ($229) a month, but she must support two unemployed sons and a daughter who live with her. And Naima is not considered poor in the country. Still, price increases would put a huge burden on her. The current economic and currency crisis in Egypt contains a great deal of explosive power. Should the state not find a solution acceptable to Egypt's society, revolts such as those of 1977 are likely. At that time, people power forced the president to revoke subsidy cuts.


Artists at GMF: 'Art offers a great platform for dialogue' Ahmed al-Basheer, satirist from Iraq, Aeham Ahmed, Syrian pianist, Ammar Abo Bakr, Egyptian street artist, as well as German musicians Samy Deluxe and Fetsum discussed the effects of art on politics. Soul singer Fetsum “Old issues should not be the issues of the future generation. This is what I try to convey with my music,” said Fetsum at the last day of this year’s Global Media Forum. ”We need to pick up a dialogue instead of demonizing issues. Art and music offer a great platform to do this.” Comedian Ahmed al-Basheer When asked how one could possibly choose satire after suffering such tragedy in their own country and within their family, al-Basheer explained: “If you really want to hurt somebody in the Middle East, make fun of them. It will hurt them more than hitting them in their face or pointing a gun at them.” After his satire TV show initially launched in Iraq, however, the audience did not receive it very well: “They thought that making fun of Iraqi politics also meant that I was making fun of our country and its people. The turning point came when the Iraqi people understood that humor could change something and saw the truth in it.” Pianist Aeham Ahmad Back in Syria, Aeham Ahmed’s art was also met with incomprehension. “People in Syria don’t understand classical music. Now, that I am here in Europe, I can mix classical and Arabic and begin to make my own music,” said Ahmed. “I don’t need to start a revolution. I just want to see that my music is making children laugh in the streets of Syria.” Every day Ahmed said goodbye to his wife before leaving the house since the pianist wasn’t sure if he’d come back. “I told her: I am not doing something bad. I am not fighting, I only make music.” Artist Ammar Abo Bakr Abo Bakr found himself questioning the job of an artist: “Should I paint and then just sell my art to somebody?” The muralist decided to have his own revolution in the streets: “With my art, I want to engage with citizens on the streets. I try to keep a visual memory of the revolution so that people remember what happened in Egypt.” Singer Samy Deluxe For Samy Deluxe, growing up in Germany was quite “traumatizing”, he even called himself “half-black” at some point. Thus he recommended: “Shape your own culture and views. Don’t let society do it for you.” Referring to the very current topic of the AfD party, Samy Deluxe added: “It is not shocking that something like this happens. We need to keep the dialogue open on as many fronts as possible.” Fetsum backed his colleague and quoted a German saying: “Fear is always a bad consultant. Everybody needs to invest in the world they want to live in – no matter who you are or where you come from. Freedom means being free to choose what you want to do with your life, but at the same time you have to take responsibility for your actions.”


Islamists rounded up by Egyptian military The Egyptian security apparatus has launched a massive crackdown against leading Islamists and their followers. There are indications that the Muslim Brotherhood is being used as a scapegoat. Since Egypt's military ousted President Mohammed Morsi from power, the country's security forces have put the Muslim Brotherhood and other Islamists under massive pressure. Egyptian human rights organizations are trying to document the repression. But their work has been made difficult by the large number of arrests, the authorities' lack of transparency, and the rapidly developing situation. Karim Abdelrady, a lawyer with the Arabic Network For Human Rights Information (ANHRI), has divided the arrests into two categories: the arbitrary mass detention of Islamist supporters and the arrest of their leaders. Last Monday, security forces opened fire on protesters outside of a Republican Guard facility, killing more than 50 people. "During the latest clashes in front of the Republican Guard building, more than 650 people were arrested," Abdelrady told DW. "These people were not members of the Muslim Brotherhood's leadership. They were detained at random in many places close to the building." Interior Ministry sharply criticized Abdelrady assumes that many of the detained were not guilty and were simply demonstrating peacefully. But some of the people arrested were armed, he adds. Morsi has not been seen since he was detained by the military on July 3 Abdelrady's statistics come from the Front for the Defense of the Demonstrators. ANHRI belongs to this network. Their lawyers go to the police stations in order to investigate the number of arrests and where they took place. Abdelrady said that the number of officially reported detentions was considerably lower than the real figure. When ANHRI confronted the authorities with higher arrest numbers, state officials are said to have confirmed that the group's statistics were correct. Arbitrary mass arrests are not unusual in Egypt. During street battles, the police often simply arrest anyone who is in the immediate vicinity of the violence. Gamal Eid, director of ANHRI, criticized the Interior Ministry's current behavior. "When their spokesman made a statement, he defended the authorities and said that the Interior Ministry had made no mistakes," Eid told DW. "Everything was blamed on the Muslim Brotherhood. He even alluded to the time when Mubarak was still in office." Arrest warrants against leadership The spokesman's statement indicates that the Interior Ministry is trying to blame the Muslim Brotherhood for its own misdeeds. In addition to the mass detentions, at least six high-ranking members of the Muslim Brotherhood and two well-known Salafists have been arrested. Among them is the chief strategist for the Brotherhood, Khairat el-Shaiter, as well as the former parliamentary president, Saad Katatni. Priyanka Mothoparty, with Human Rights Watch (HRW) in Egypt, said that the Brotherhood has no recourse to legal representation. "When two high-level individuals in the leadership in the Muslim Brotherhood were being arrested, they called on the head lawyer for the Brotherhood to come and represent them," Mothoparty told DW. "When he arrived, he was also placed under arrest because there was a warrant out for him." Large numbers of Muslim Brotherhood supporters have been detained According to HRW, the military is also holding 10 members of President Morsi's former cabinet without contact to the outside world. In the meantime, an additional 10 arrest warrants have been issued against the leadership of the Muslim Brotherhood, Abdelrady said. Among those wanted is the head of the Muslim Brotherhood, Mohammed Badie. He is believed to be holed up with other Islamist leaders on the protest grounds in Nasser City, an outlying district of Cairo. Additional arrest warrants are likely. Most of the arrested Islamists have been accused of inciting violence. For at least some of the wanted there are videos that seem to prove those accusations. 'State should protect demonstrators' The Islamists, who were arrested outside of the Republican Guard building, accuse the authorities of murder. Abdelrady said that the military has used excessive force against the demonstrators. "The state should protect the demonstrators and interact with them professionally," he said. "There was no reason to use live ammunition. They could have controlled the situation in another way." The military claims that it has found weapons in the Muslim Brotherhood's headquarters. Meanwhile, the regime has increasingly begun to propagate conspiracy theories. According to the Associated Press, charges have been filed against 30 high-level members of the Brotherhood, who are accused breaking out of prison with the help of Hamas during the 2011 revolution. In addition, the security agencies have closed the headquarters of the Freedom and Justice Party, the Muslim Brotherhood's partisan political wing. The distribution of the party's magazine has also been massively restricted.


Egyptians protest against constitution Egyptians opposed to the constitution put forward by President Mohammed Morsi are protesting in Cairo. The demonstrations come a day after Egypt's top prosecutor felt compelled to resign. Opponents to Egypt's government on Tuesday took to the streets of Cairo in protest against a constitution that has divided the county but looks set to be approved by referendum. Hundreds of activists gathered outside the presidential palace, chanting "Revolution, revolution, for the sake of the constitution" and called on Morsi to "Leave, leave, you coward!". Numbers were down in comparison to previous demonstrations. "I have been camping here for weeks and will continue to do so until the constitution that divided the nation, and for which people died, gets scrapped," said 30-year-old Mohamed Adel, who was protesting at the presidential palace. The protests came a day after the political wing of Morsi's Muslim Brotherhood said that its unofficial tallies pointed to 57 percent public support for the draft document in the first round of voting, which took place on December 15. The National Salvation Front opposition coalition has claimed voting violations, allegations which the Ministry of Justice said it was making steps to investigate. With the second round of voting taking place in districts considered more sympathetic to the Muslim Brotherhood on December 22, the constitution appears likely to pass. Judiciary turmoil On Monday, Morsi also faced turmoil on the judicial front: Egypt's top prosecutor Talaat Ibrahim resigned amid pressure, less than a month after Morsi appointed him to the post. Public prosecutors had staged a sit-in outside Ibrahim's office on Monday, demanding that he step down. They argued Morsi's appointment of the prosecutor was inappropriate, saying that the Supreme Judicial Council, which oversees Egypt's judicial system, should have taken the decision. Following the resignation, Morsi's Muslim Brotherhood posted a statement on its Facebook page, branding the enforced resignation a "crime." The organization also said that the Supreme Judiciary Council should refuse to accept Ibrahim's resignation. Discord within the courts has slowed the voting process as Egypt holds a referendum on a new potential constitution. Several judges have boycotted the vote, refusing to play their role as supervisors of the ballot; this is why the referendum was split into two days of voting for logistical reasons. sej/msh (AFP, AP, dpa, Reuters)


Egyptian president addresses senate Egyptian President Mohamed Morsi has made his first speech to the upper house of parliament. He called on the opposition to avoid violence and work with him to rebuild the country's economy. In his first speech to the country's upper house of parliament, Egypt's Islamist president has warned against any unrest that could harm the drive to repair the country's economy. He said the opposition should work with his government and turn to "production, work, seriousnessness" after two years of conflict. In his hour long televised speech, President Morsi blamed protests and violence over the last month - mainly in response to the controversial new constitution - for causing further damage to an economy already in crisis. Until recently, the upper house of parliament, called the Shura Council, has had few powers. But under the new constitution it is acting as the law-making body until a new legislating lower house is chosen in national elections expected within the next few months. The Council has an overwhelming Islamist majority, mainly from Morsi's Muslim Brotherhood supporters and the allied, ultraconservative Salafis. Morsi called on the opposition to drop its refusals to deal with his government. He repeated his invitation for it to join his national dialogue to draw up key legislation to put before parliament, including a law organizing the parliamentary elections. Morsi again promised to reshuffle his cabinet. Two ministers, including one of his Islamist allies, have so far resigned in disagreements over government policy. All sides must "realize the needs of the moment" and work only through "mature democracy while avoiding violence," he told the 270-member Council. "We condemn and reject all forms of violence by individuals, groups, institutions and even from the nation and its government. This is completely rejected." Financial woes Morsi criticised people who were talking down the economy: "Those who talk about bankruptcy, they are the ones who are are bankrupt. Egypt will never be bankrupt and will not kneel, God willing," he said. Egypt has been facing a financial crisis amid doubts over the government's ability to push through unpopular spending cuts and tax hikes needed to persuade the International Monetary Fund to agree to a $4.8 billion (3.6 billion euro) loan. Also on Saturday, Finance Minister Mumtaz al-Saeed said that Egypt had received the final instalment out of a total of $2 billion promised by Qatar. He said a further $500 million loan from Turkey would be paid at the end of January. Morsi also repeated his support for Syrian rebels, saying: "The Syrians' revolution, and we support it, will achieve its goals of freedom and dignity." jm/jlw (AP, AFP)


Early results indicate resounding 'yes' on Egyptian constitution Egyptians have overwhelmingly supported a new draft constitution, state media have reported. The referendum paves the way for presidential and parliamentary elections later this year. More than 97 percent of voters backed the constitution, the state-run al-Ahram newspaper reported on Thursday citing initial returns. Official results are expected on Saturday. Turnout for the two-day referendum was at around 36 percent of Egypt's 53 million eligible voters, reported al-Ahram, slightly above the 33 percent of voters who went to the polls and approved the Islamist-drafted charter constitution under then-President Mohammed Morsi. The Interior Ministry, meanwhile, said turnout was significantly higher, putting the number at more than 55 percent. "Early indications point to the fact that Egyptians made history this week with a high level of participation in the vote on the draft constitution," Egypt's spokesman for the presidency, Ehab Badawy, said in a statement. Expected result The draft charter, which was expected to be comfortably approved, forwards the transition plan of Egypt's interim government, which was appointed after Morsi was deposed in a military-backed coup last July. "This vote represents a resounding rejection of terrorism and a clear endorsement of the roadmap to democracy, as well as economic development and stability," said Badawy. The new constitution, which is devoid of the Islamist language contained in the 2012 charter passed under Morsi, grants increased powers to the military, police and judiciary. The government and its supporters called the referendum a key part of restoring Egypt to democracy. The country's interim leadership, however, appears to have left little room for dissent. Following the coup, the government passed a law restricting protests, including secular demonstrations. In the run-up to the vote, both Islamist and secular protesters were arrested for campaigning against the referendum, including important figures of the 2011 revolution that toppled Hosni Mubarak. Since Morsi's ouster, his followers - particularly the Muslim Brotherhood organization - have been the focus of a violent government crackdown. More than 1,000 of his followers have been killed in street clashes, while many of the Brotherhood's members have been arrested or forced underground. One student was killed Thursday in clashes between Morsi supporters and opponents. 'False referendum' The Brotherhood-led National Alliance for Legitimacy Support, which has organized near-daily protests since the coup and boycotted this week's vote, rejected the referendum results. "The coup plotters are deceiving themselves and the results of the false referendum will not lend them legitimacy," the alliance said in a statement. Western governments have criticized the Egyptian government's crackdown on protesters. However, the US appears set to pass a bill that would unfreeze of the $1.5 billion in aid to the country if it can certify that Egypt "has held a constitutional referendum, and is taking steps to support a democratic transition." Presidential and parliamentary elections are set to follow the constitution's approval. The leading candidate for Egypt's highest office is army chief General Abdel-Fattah el-Sissi, the man widely seen as the architect of the coup against Morsi. Although he has not officially announced his intentions to run, Sissi has indicated he would seek the presidency by "popular demand." dr/ph (dpa, Reuters, AP, AFP)


Across the divide, Egyptians urged to vote 'yes' As Egypt votes on the country's third constitution in almost four years, nearly all parties with political sway have been urging Egyptians to approve it, despite concerns over potentially harmful provisions. In a country where the space for political dissent is shrinking, some say parties are taking the gamble that their support for the interim government will translate into an interpretation and application of the new charter that favors them. For Nader Bakkar, the co-founder of the Salafi Al Nour party, an article in Egypt's draft constitution that prohibits political parties formed on a religious basis could threaten his ultraconservative Islamist party's very existence. But Bakkar and his party, ironically, are among the charter's most ardent proponents. "We cannot sacrifice the vote on the basis of this constitutional amendment in light of the overall context of what Egypt is facing right now, of violence, of terrorism, of what the Muslim Brotherhood is driving the country to," Bakkar told DW. "We know it is not the end of the story and we just want to move forward on the roadmap until the whole of the Egyptian people can rejoin the political process." Along stretches of highway in Cairo, signs are mounted on every post and in iconic Tahrir Square, the center of Egypt's revolution, a massive billboard with a large checked box hangs, all calling on Egyptians to vote yes. "At the end of the day, our ideological demands were met, but for our political demands, we feel like we sacrificed a lot," said Bakkar, whose party held more than 20 percent of the seats in Egypt's last parliament. Once allied with the Muslim Brotherhood, the party supported the July military coup and has become the only Islamist representative in the new government. "We cannot neglect that an article is there for banning parties based on a religious basis, and that this was created specifically for Islamic parties, even though our legal position is matched 100 percent by law with this article," said Bakkar, acutely aware that his opponents could try to interpret the clause to their detriment. Under the rule of former autocrat Hosni Mubarak, a similar ban was in place. Nonetheless, he described the draft as "generally acceptable" and said there would be opportunity for change in the future. For Bakkar, the passage of the new charter is paramount in moving the country forward on the roadmap to democracy. "Unfortunately, if it doesn't pass, there will be severe consequences, the Muslim Brotherhood and other groups who are against the whole process after June 30 will continue on their way of violence and of protesting, and I think the only solution here will be for the military again to take over," said Bakkar. "And this will be the hard part of the story because now we are on our way to rejoin the democratic process again that is run under civilians and the military is just a keeper behind the field," he added. The country is still wracked by violent protests Vote for freedom At the other end of the political spectrum, liberal parties too are overwhelmingly calling for a yes vote. "We think that the constitution is opening freedoms. We think that the articles in this constitution are much better than the articles in the 2012 constitution," said Shehab Wagih, the spokesperson for Free Egyptians Party, a liberal party founded after the 2011 revolution by business tycoon Naguib Sawiris. Supporters of the draft, like Wagih, say it improves on issues such as education, healthcare, and the rights of women and disabled, while eliminating many of the Islamist-leaning sections included in the 2012 constitution. But Wagih's party has voiced concerns over specific provisions as well, most notably its clause that allows for military trials for civilians, a hallmark of the Mubarak era and the rule of the Supreme Council of Armed Forces following the revolution in 2011. The trials were often used as a means to swiftly try and convict political dissidents. Still, he is adamant in his support for the new draft. "Of course there are parts we are not in agreement with, but we had to come to a political consensus," he said. "From the far left to the far right, we all reached a consensus about this constitution, so we are calling for a yes votes." But the draft constitution could pose other problems for liberal parties in particular, according to Michele Dunne, a senior associate at the Middle East program at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace and an expert on political and economic change in Egypt, by bringing back an electoral system used under Mubarak. Depite a ban, the Muslim Brotherhood could benefit "These parties, like the Free Egyptians Party, assumed that they would be the beneficiaries of the Brotherhood being eliminated from the political scene, that they would get a much larger share in the parliament in the future when the Brotherhood are not competing," Dunne told DW. "However, now there is a lot of talk that perhaps the parliamentary elections will be organized primarily in terms of individual seats." Return to Mubarak days? Analysts say that when candidates are allowed to run a individuals rather than on party lists, it is a disadvantage to political parties and discourages the growth and development of mature political parties. It could also allow members of Mubarak's National Democratic Party, which was banned, to run on individual seats. When the issue arose during the drafting by the 50-member constitutional committee, it caused great controversy among members and rather than holding up the vote on the draft, the committee decided to leave it to interim president Adly Mansour to decide, rather than explicitly laying it out in the text. "If most of the seats are for individual candidates, that will mean that money, local affiliations, family, clan, closeness of individuals to the military, the security services, these things will be the factors that determine who's in the new parliament," said Dunne. Dunne said it was just another example of how the new draft leaves much up to the vagaries of implementing legislation like past constitutions did. "Some of the more liberal political parties are having to tell their supporters to vote yes on the constitution, without really knowing how much of a benefit they as political parties are going to get in return for their support, without knowing clearly what the constitution will be for them because it leaves some major political decisions undecided," said Dunne. But while liberal parties may be taking a risk, others say there is little other choice. Parties who have openly campaigned for a No vote say they have faced repression. Members of the Strong Egypt party, a political party founded by former presidential candidate Abdel Moneim Aboul Fotouh, announced on January 6 that they would consider a boycott of the referendum after security forces arrested a number of its members while putting up stickers and posters calling for people to vote no. Crackdown The country is nervous about the outcome of the referendum  The Muslim Brotherhood, who have also announced they will boycott the referendum, have been the target of an ongoing violent crackdown. "You won't be hearing much from the parties who do not support passage of the referendum because basically they are not given much access to express their opinion," said Dunne. But if recent history is an indicator, other analysts say those supporting the constitution with the belief that it will be interpreted to their favor and that legislation to their benefit will be put in place could be disappointed. "It is not the first time that political forces have argued against their best interests in a constitutional reform process. The Muslim Brotherhood is a very clear example," said Zaid Al-Ali, Senior Adviser on Constitution Building at the International Institute for Democracy and Electoral Assistance. "The 2012 constitution was the first time that very clear and explicit guarantees for the military were provided for, guarantees that were never provided for before in writing, and it was provided by the Muslim Brotherhood." "They defended it on the basis that it was necessary politically," he added. "And look where that got them six months later."


Ibrahim Mehlib named Egypt's new prime minister Egypt's interim presidency has named Ibrahim Mehlib as the country's next prime minister. The former construction magnate takes over for Hazem el-Bablaw, who resigned on Monday. Interim president Adly Mansour announced Mehlib's appointment on Tuesday, a day after Egypt's cabinet stepped down. Mehlib, who led the country's largest construction company for more than a decade, told reporters that his cabinet members will be "holy warriors" in the service of the Egyptian people. "We will work on restoring security and defeating terrorism," Mahlem said at a press conference in Cairo. "Continuing [Egypt's transitional] roadmap is the top priority of this government." The new cabinet will be formed in three days, he added. Prior to the 2011 revolution that toppled longtime dictator Hosni Mubarak, Mehlib, a former housing minister, was a senior member of the then-ruling National Democratic Party. Clearing the way for Sissi The resignation of el-Bablaw and the rest of Egypt's military-backed government on Monday was seen as paving the way for the country's former Defense Minister Field Marshal Abdel-Fattah el-Sissi to run for president. In order to be eligible for the presidency, Sissi had to step down from his ministry post. Sissi orchestrated the military coup that toppled former President Mohammed Morsi, Egypt's first democratically elected leader, last July. Since then, he has gained widespread support in the country, been lavished with media praise and is widely expected to the presidency in elections slated for April under a new constitution. A security source quoted by Reuters said Interior Minister Mohamed Ibrahim was likely to retain his post in a new cabinet. Ibrahim spearheaded a campaign to crack down on the Muslim Brotherhood associated with Morsi. dr/ipj (AP, dpa, AFP)


Millions of Egyptians want to overthrow their president By collecting millions of signatures, opponents of Egyptian President Mohamed Morsi are pressuring his Muslim Brotherhood. Organizers have planned a large protest for June 30, which could turn violent. Mohamed is standing in front of his tiny café. It consists of two plastic chairs and a gas cooker in a blue metal cabinet, situated in a small alley. The 49-year-old is angry at President Morsi and the Muslim Brotherhood. He can hardly make the 10 Egyptian pounds (roughly one Euro) a day he needs to feed his son, because of rising prices, Mohamed says. On top of that there are the constant blackouts, the short supply of gas and Morsi's many broken promises. A lot of people think like Mohamed. Only 28 percent of Egyptians still support the president, according to a recent poll by the Zogby Institute. "The situation is close to unbearable," Mohamed says. "We were a lot better off under Mubarak and his interior minister. Back then, at least we lived in safety. Today, we're not even safe in broad daylight." 15 million signatures against the president Mohamed with son Islam in front of his café This anger toward the president and the politics of the Muslim Brotherhood has found an outlet in the two-month old "Tamarod" campaign, the goal of which is to raise 15 million signatures against the president. In 2012, Morsi was elected with only 13 million votes. The campaign's initiators hope to force the president to resign this way. For June 30, Tamarod has announced a large protest in front of the presidential palace to further pressure Morsi and to continue the Egyptian revolution. Tamarod is the Egyptian word for "rebel." Moheb Doss is one of six founders of the campaign, for which people are currently collecting signatures on almost every Cairo street corner. They are facing tough opposition. "Some of our people have been attacked," Doss reports. "In some cases, their signature lists were taken from them. Our female activists have been harassed." In addition, young members of the Muslim Brotherhood collected signatures with the same forms and then threw them away to intercept votes against Morsi. No post-Morsi plans Despite the attempts to boycott it, the protest has been extraordinarily successful. The campaign's spokesman announced on June 19 that the number of 15 million signatures had already been exceeded. Moheb Doss is one of the Tamarod organizers Many people who put their name on the Tamarod lists feel betrayed by their president. While some of them elected Morsi a year ago, today many only see him as the Brotherhood's authoritarian representative. But it's unclear what would come after a possible coup. The leaders of the political opposition aren't popular with the people either. 21-year old Ahmed says: "By now I've realized that it's only about power with those guys as well. None of them care about the people." Frustration with flawed politics If Morsi was overthrown, some members of the opposition want the head of the constitutional court announced president, so he can form a transitional government until new elections are held. But it remains unclear how legitimate this government would be and where it would get its power. For some protesters, it's less about democracy anyway and more about their pent-up frustration with the flaws of politics. "I want the army to take back power and deal with all those thieves, criminals and people with knives, swords and handguns," Mohamed, the café owner, says. "As long as that happens, I don't care who's president – even if it's an Israeli." The Muslim Brotherhood conspired against them, but the Tamarod campaign still has millions of signatures to count Fear is building up in Egypt: No one knows what's going to happen on June 30, the day of the large Tamarod protest. On Friday (28.6.2013), protests in Alexandria lead to several deaths. And the Muslim Brotherhood's behavior shows how serious they are taking the situation. They felt compelled to start their own campaign and tried to bolster their president in a rally with hundreds of thousands of supporters on June 21. Morsi's prime minister called a possible coup a "catastrophe." But the Islamists are not a united front anymore. The second-strongest Islamic party, the Salafi Nour party, recently called on Morsi to make substantial concessions to the opposition. Conspiracy theories The Muslim Brotherhood's central argument is that Morsi was elected by the Egyptian people. It would thus be illegitimate and against the voters' will to overthrow the president, they say. "If people force the current president to resign, they will also force every future president to resign," Ibrahim, a young pro-Morsi protester, says. He believes that to rein in chaos, the elected president should stay in office until the end of his term. Members of the Muslim Brotherhood currently see themselves as victims and many believe the Tamarod campaign is a conspiracy by members of the Mubarak regime. Some even believe that Western countries are helping to finance it with the aim of destabilizing Egypt. The danger of escalating violence between Morsi supporters and his opponents on June 30 is high.


Events in Egypt cause tension in Tunisia Tunisians are regarding events in Egypt with a mixture of fear and admiration. The government is afraid that it could come under pressure too, while the opposition has been lifted. It's Friday afternoon. A few dozen demonstrators have gathered in front of the Egyptian embassy in Tunis. These days the building is even more heavily guarded than usual. They have come to voice their support for Egypt's ousted president, Mohammed Morsi. Most of the protesters are indeed Egyptian, but a few Tunisians have joined them, demanding the overthrow of the military. One of them is Mehdi. What happened in Egypt, he says, was a coup, but it couldn't happen here, in his own country. "Those Tamarrod people have no business here. Everything will be good if God wills it," he says, before adding that unlike in Egypt, Tunisians respect the legitimacy of its elections. Protesters have come out in support of Morsi in Tunis Watching the crowd from a distance is elementary school teacher Mohammed. He says he can only shake his head in disbelief that people still choose to defend Morsi - and hopes the protest waves will soon reach Tunisia. "Egypt has finally had its revolution - the first one wasn't a real one." He is convinced it will soon happen in Tunisia. "Political Islam has failed," he says. "The Islamists have not implemented any political reforms. They haven't tackled any problems." Now, he argues, the population will wake up and see that there are only empty words behind it, and that religion won't feed them. Mohammed wants to see a clear division between religion and state - though the freedom of religion must still be guaranteed. Marzouki wants consensus Meanwhile, Ennahdha, the largest party in the government coalition is locked in a tense silence. The magic word is the legitimacy of the urns - even if the ones in Egypt have not helped much. Members of the government have routinely condemned events in Egypt, and made assurances that this would never happen in the country that sparked the so-called Arab Spring. Tunisian President Moncef Marzouki repeated this message at the recent visit by his French counterpart Francois Hollande. "I would have liked to see the Egyptians arrive at a political consensus," he declared before condemning the interference of the army. Marzouki (right) promised that Egyptian events would not be repeated in Tunisia "In Tunisia we must not allow ourselves to be divided by ideology," Marzouki said. "The so-called Islamists and laicists must find a political consensus. We are always open for dialogue." He then went on to promise elections and the passing of a constitution within the next six months. Unity government as a solution? In the meantime, the Tunisian opposition parties have been buoyed by developments in Egypt, calling with more urgency than usual for a new political direction. Nidaa Tounes, the movement around 86-year-old former interim Prime Minister Beji Caid Essebsi, is defending Morsi's ouster and is calling for the dissolution of the constituent assembly. This has been sitting since October 2011, when it was meant to agree a new constitution for the nation of 10 million people within a year. Meanwhile, the Popular Front, an alliance of communist and other left-wing parties, is calling for the wholesale removal of government representatives. This group, the third largest political force in Tunisia according to polls, considers the military's seizure of power in Egypt as justified, and claims that Ennahdha has betrayed the aims of the revolution. In order to achieve concrete results as quickly as possible, they are calling for a commission of experts to finish writing the constitution, followed by the formation of a national unity government to lead the country out of its economic crisis.


Egyptian military's uncertain role could decide Mubarak's fate President Hosni Mubarak deployed the military to intimidate protestors. But it remains unclear whether the military will side with the regime or the uprising. Will Washington use its influence in Cairo to tip the scale? As the protests in Egypt begin to look increasingly like a revolution, President Hosni Mubarak's government has deployed the military to Cairo in a bid to intimidate a population now calling for his resignation. Where the military's loyalty really lies is an open question that could decide the fate of Mubarak's regime. Meanwhile, US President Barack Obama has called for calm and asked for the demands of the protestors to be addressed. Yet Egypt is one of the largest recipients of US military aid, second only to Israel. The Egyptian security apparatus is bankrolled by Washington to an annual sum of $1.3 billion (0.9 billion euros). At least 38 Egyptians have already lost their lives in the violence. In response, the Obama Administration has announced that future military aid to Cairo will be subject to how Mubarak's regime treats the protestors. Will Washington use its influence to push Mubarak toward greater concessions? Out in force After five days of tangling with protestors in Cairo, the riot police have made way for the military. However, the Mubarak regime's show of force has had little effect on the intensity of the uprising, which continued on Saturday despite a government imposed curfew. So far, the Egyptian military has shown restraint and not engaged the crowds. Rainer Sollich, head of Deutsche Welle's Arabic division, said the protestors initially welcomed the arrival of the military after violent clashes with police. "They [protestors] were even writing slogans of solidarity and against Mubarak on the tanks," Sollich said. "The military is very popular in Egypt because it was very helpful in certain situations of Egyptian history, for example when there were floods or not enough bread." But Sollich cautioned that Mubarak himself is a former air force officer who also has influence over the armed forces. "In my opinion it's not quite clear who's ruling the military in this situation right now," he said "Formally, it's Mubarak. But Mubarak gave the order for the curfew last night and the military didn't attack the demonstrators even though they were violating the curfew." Military brass pressuring Mubarak? And according to Hebatallah Ismail-Hafez, a Deutsche Welle correspondent originally from Cairo, there is talk on the street that the upper echelons of the military are putting pressure on the Mubarak regime.  Mubarak has been unable to satisfy the demands of the people. "There are strong rumors that the military, the upper officers, are in consultation with still President Hosni Mubarak, in which they are suggesting that an interim government should take power," Ismail-Hafez said. "Naturally the question then is what will happen to Mubarak." Ismail-Hafez went on to say that the soldiers deployed in Cairo are likely to display restraint until the military's high brass gives word about the Mubarak regime's future. Washington still cautious Up to this point, Washington has approached the uprising in Egypt cautiously. Both President Obama and Secretary of State Hillary Clinton have urged Mubarak to take concrete steps toward reform. However, they have not made any direct statements about regime change. "I think the US government is currently considering what kind of alternatives there are, whether there's someone in the military or a civilian like Mohammed ElBaradei that they could support," Ismail-Hafez said. "They are reacting very slowly, and it probably has to do with the fact that they are not sure how strong the Mubarak regime still is, whether or not he has back up plans to bring the situation under control." Mubarak has been a reliable US ally in a tumultuous region. He has kept Islamists in Egypt under wraps, facilitated negotiations between Israel and Palestine, and supported Washington's efforts against Iran. In turn, Washington continues to reward Mubarak with billions in military aid, allowing him to maintain a firm grip on power. But as time passes and the protests intensify, Mubarak may become a liability to Washington and the aid could dry up. According to Sollich, Obama's clear yet restrained support of the protestors may signal a new posture. "It's the first step to show more clear solidarity with the democratic movement in Egypt," he said. "It is difficult for every government in the West to distance themselves from existing governments who are partners." Author: Spencer Kimball Editor: Rob Mudge


Alaa al-Aswany: 'I write to defend freedom, to defend democracy' Best-selling novelist Alaa al-Aswany was one of the main protagonists in the 2011 Egyptian uprising, and remains a high-profile government critic. He spoke with DW about his work and his struggle against dictatorship. DW: You've always been optimistic as to the future development in Egypt. In 2013 you said: "I believe in people and in the revolution." Do you still feel the same today? Alaa al-Aswany: Absolutely. I'm not happy with what is happening in Egypt, but I'm optimistic. And I'm optimistic for objective reasons. Because I read the history of revolutions and I know that it takes time. Look at a classic example: the French Revolution. After five years nothing was achieved and the situation was absolutely chaotic. Everybody was killing everybody in France, but in the end the revolution did overcome. So, I still believe in the [Egyptian] people, and I still believe in the revolution. As co-founder of the Kifaya (Enough!) civil society movement, what is your judgment in retrospective? When did the Arab rebellion take a wrong turn? Our major mistake was that we left Tahrir Square after the resignation of [former President Hosni] Mubarak without building up a committee of representatives of the revolution. We should not have left the square before electing representatives of the revolution in every part of Egypt. You have called President Abdel-Fattah el-Sissi a new Mubarak. Has Egypt turned into a military dictatorship? Since 1952, we as a people have been torn between two terrible choices: a dictatorship with army support, and a religious fanatic dictatorship. The revolution has been a project of the third path: to build up a democratic state which is not religious, and not military. In 2013 you supported the downfall of [Islamist President Mohammed] Morsi and called the Muslim Brotherhood Islamist group terrorists. But today, there is less and less room for a free civil society. Isn't el-Sissi's military regime exaggerating the danger of the Muslim Brotherhood? No. Calling the Muslim Brotherhood terrorists is absolutely justified. After the military intervention in 2013, they burned around 200 churches and killed many people. That was the context in which I said they are terrorists. The reason why I and many millions of Egyptians called for an early presidential election was Morsi's decree in November 2012, which cancelled the democratic system and Egyptian law, making Morsi a kind of Turkish sultan. And that was not acceptable to anybody. I'm absolutely against the massacre of the Muslim Brotherhood members, and I'm against the repression by the current regime. But I'm also against the decree made by [Morsi] because that was the act of a dictator. In 2013 you supported the military, but now many of the revolutionaries you stood with are in prison. Are you yourself under attack? Yes, I have been under attack from the beginning. Egyptians asked for an early presidential election, there were millions of people in the streets, because they didn't trust Morsi - nobody trusted him. [At the time], there were thousands of Islamists calling - and you could find that on YouTube - calling for the killing of the other side, killing the millions who are against the Muslim Brotherhood. There were speeches by these people, saying they will create rivers of blood. The military intervention to prevent a civil war, in my opinion, was the duty of the army. But the military intervention should not have meant that the army could rise to power. I never supported el-Sissi as a president. And I wrote - at that time I was allowed to publish in Egypt - I wrote that the election of el-Sissi was not democratic, and I gave examples. That's why I'm under attack. For the last two years, I have not been able to publish my articles. I am under attack in the media, banned from TV appearances. I don't feel comfortable at all. Have you ever considered leaving Egypt? I am able to stay abroad. But I'm not going to leave Egypt unless obliged. I want to stay in my country like anybody else. But at some point, if I feel I am obliged, I will leave. How does censorship in Egypt work? We have official censorship for show business: for TV, for theater and for the cinema. But even for books and newspapers, we have strong censorship enforced in an unofficial way. All the TV channels and newspapers in Egypt that aren't state-run are owned by businessmen. And these businessmen, they don't need any problems with the regime. Just one phone call from anyone linked to security to any businessman in Egypt is enough to cancel a writer's contract, or to ban any speaker from a TV appearance. I have friends who were banned, and that's what happened with me. The newspaper owner did anything to get me to leave, and then he never asked me to write again. Censorship is indirect. It's not visible, it's not official, but it's very strong. Is that why you started writing a weekly column for DW's Arab service? I am committed; it is my duty to write. I've been writing weekly columns for years. This is the first time that I haven't been able to write for two years. It happened under Mubarak, but only for three months. DW has a very good professional reputation, and will give me the chance to transmit my ideas and my articles to a very broad spectrum of readers, both in Egypt and abroad. Al-Aswany took part in the massive Tahrir Square protests against former President Mohammed Morsi in November 2012 Foreign NGOs are under pressure in Egypt. How do you see Europe's role in Egypt, and its claim to stand up for human rights? To tell the truth, I don't expect much from Western governments when it comes to supporting democracy in the Arab world. Because Western governments - including the American government - have always been supporting the interests of multinational corporations, of industry. I'm sorry to say that, but I always say what I think - I believe most Western governments are absolutely prepared to support any dictator if it will bring money to Western companies. But when it comes to the Western people, to me this is very different. Western governments have been supporting Mubarak for 30 years - and they knew what kind of a terrible dictator he was. But people in the West were supporting the revolution. Many European intellectuals were very understanding of our struggle for democracy. I don't put the Western governments and the Western people in the same basket. "The Yacoubian Building," first published in 2002, has been translated into many languages and adapted into an acclaimed film You're a best-selling author: in Egypt alone, your novels ("The Yacoubian Building," "Chicago: A Novel" and "The Automobile Club of Egypt") have each sold more than 100,000 copies and have been translated into 30 languages. "The Yacoubian Building" was even made into an internationally acclaimed movie. How do you divide your time as an activist and a writer - and are you still working as a dentist? Yes, I'm still working as a dentist. Really? Yes. I cannot write fiction more than five to six hours a day. And I only write in the early morning, I cannot write late. So I wake up at 6 a.m., 6:30 I'm at my desk - and I've been doing this for years - and I write for five or six hours. After that, I become a dentist. I have my clinic in the same house, and go downstairs to see my patients. It's very useful for the novelist to have contact with people every day. Do you still work politically? In Egypt, we don't have politics because we don't have a democracy. It's a struggle for democracy, not politics. For that reason any writer, not only myself, is committed to take part in this struggle. Writing is basically a kind of artistic defense of human values. You write to defend freedom, to defend human rights. It's part of your duty to be in the struggle for democracy. I believe writing itself is a commitment. I write because I disagree. I write because I'm angry. I write because the distance between what happens and what should happen is very big. I write to defend freedom, to defend democracy, to defend the dignity of the helpless. I write to struggle against the dictator. And that's why I write. What are you working on at present? I'm working on a new novel, which I hope to finish by the beginning of next year. I've been working on this novel now for about three years. It always takes me three to four years to finish a novel - it's a lot of work, a lot of research. Does it already have a title? Yes: "The Republic As If." The idea is that in a dictatorship, the only truth is the dictator. Everything looks as if it were true, but it's fake. Alaa al-Aswany, born in 1957, may well be Egypt's most prominent living writer. His novels are extremely successful in the Arab world and beyond. Between his work as a dentist and novelist, al-Aswany remains a high-profile critic of President Abdel-Fattah el-Sissi. In May, he began publishing a weekly column for DW's Arab service. This interview has been condensed and edited for clarity.


Egyptians divided by Morsi's plan Demonstrations for and against Egyptian President Morsi took place this weekend in Cairo. Egyptians face the uneasy choice of supporting a constitutional draft or starting the process over from the beginning. The Egyptian power struggle between the Islamists on one side and the liberals and secular parties on the other does not show any signs of abating. After two major protests held by the non-Islamist parties, the Muslim Brotherhood and Salafists showed their strength on Saturday (01.12.2012). Hundreds of thousands took to the streets of Cairo to demonstrate support for President Mohammed Morsi and his controversial presidential decree. State television made a point of showing the massive rally for Morsi. The license plates on the many empty, parked busses left little doubt that many of the participants were not from Cairo, but brought into the city from other parts of Egypt. After the demonstration, the busses were gone. Constitutional referendum for a divided people Scherif Abd El-Wahab said he was pleased with the draft constitution Scherif Abd El-Wahab, a 60-year-old man from Alexandria, summarized his fellow Islamists' positions: "I am here today to support the country and the elected president. The people at Tahrir Square were for dissolving parliament and now they want to dissolve the constitutional assembly. They want to destroy the country." Late on Saturday evening, Morsi announced a referendum on the draft constitution would be held on December 15. In the square where Islamists demonstrate, the announcement was met with cheering and fireworks. A few kilometers away at Tahrir Square, home to the anti-Morsi demonstrations, people raised their shoes to show their contempt for Morsi and the draft constitution. Deeply divided, the likelihood of compromise after Morsi's speech is small. President's double-dealing Morsi's speech also showed the contradictions between his statements and actual developments. In his speech, he called for "national dialogue," but there was little in the way of dialogue in how the Islamists pushed the draft constitution through past nearly all resistance put up by secular groups. Morsi stated his estimation of the judiciary, despite using a decree to annul its authority. Finally, the president emphasized that the constitution would guarantee freedom of expression and religion but both of these human rights are limited by the constitutional draft. Still for Morsi's supporters, the constitution is ideal. "For me it's just important that Shariah law is used to govern the country," said Mostafa, a man in his mid-30s. "I won't vote for it. The liberals and secular groups were in the constitutional assembly, but they left before the constitution was passed. They do not want the country to have a constitution." Morsi addressed the constitutional assembly on Saturday A divided people will decide in two weeks time whether the draft becomes Egypt's constitution, and it is currently impossible to gauge how the poll will end. The Muslim Brotherhood is not making it easy for Egyptians: they have presented a vote approving the draft constitution as a step towards stability and an end to the Morsi's dictatorial powers. A vote to reject the draft, on the other hand, would lead to the creation of a new constitutional assembly that would have to come up with a new document. The consequences would be months of insecurity with Morsi in office as president. Tough choice There is no easy choice for Egyptians who have grown tired of revolutions. On top of that, many people are simply poorly informed. "The constitution is excellent, really excellent," Sherif Abd El-Wahab said. "It covers everything - even the minorities because it gives them all rights, especially the Christians." But it's religious minorities, including Shia Muslims, who face the most discrimination under the draft constitution. In a sign of protest, Christians also pulled all their representatives out of the constitutional assembly. Judiciary boycott Crowds kept judges from reaching the courthouse How exactly a constitutional referendum will take place without the support of the judiciary is also unclear. Most judges have gone on strike, including those sitting on the Constitutional Court. On Sunday, the court said it would consider dissolving the constitutional assembly. To prevent that the Islamists blocked the court building's entrance after which the court adjourned its duties indefinitely. In a statement, the court said it was a dark day for Egypt and that judges were unable to work in the current conditions of hate and agitation. On Sunday, the judges, who typically give their seal of approval to votes, said they would be unwilling to preside over the constitutional referendum.


Youssef: 'I prefer satire with absolutely no borders' Egyptian satirist Bassem Youssef was a cardiac surgeon before appearing as a satirist in a popular television show. In a talk with DW, Youssef talks about how social illnesses come in the way of liberation. DW: Mr. Youssef, you're also a doctor. If we look at the Arab world and we see it as a patient, is it a healthy patient or is it hurting? Bassem Youssef: It is a patient that has been plagued with diseases for the past few decades. This is because of dictatorships, social pressures and conservatism that stand in the way of liberating ideas and minds. I think it is a phase that we will surpass, like every single country in the world that has had problems like this - even Europe, which is now considered the beacon of freedom. It's had that difficult time - and not very long ago, just in the past century. I am hopeful and I think we will surpass this phase very soon. So you think the Arab Spring was not in vain? No. I always say revolution is not an event. It's a process, a process that takes time. And you cannot heal the illnesses of 60 or 70 years of dictatorships in 18 days. You're from Egypt yourself. How do you consider the situation in Egypt regarding the freedom of expression under al-Sisi? Have you read "1984" by George Orwell? It is basically an Orwellian fantasy - but it's not even well written. At least "1984" was poetically written. Freedom of expression is still far away for Egypt, where things haven't changed much despite protests that began in 2011 Regarding freedom of expression, what role does satire play for you? I think that satire is a great way to bring people together to speak about freedom of expression. It is more palatable for many people to listen to you that way. People might not listen to a serious, boring political talk, but they will listen to satire. They will listen to comedy, because it brings them together. Do you think satire has borders? No, I prefer satire with absolutely no borders. I think there are no borders in satire, there are borders in the minds of people. You had to leave your country. Is satire helping you cope with that? I'm doing a different show now in the United States, using satire in a different country, different language, different context. To start all over again at the age of 42 is a challenge and I'm happy to go through this challenge. Would you like to go back to Egypt? Do you miss it? Well, of course. Who doesn't want to go back to his country? But I think it would be a little bit risky. Are you still able to somehow use your influence in Egypt to change the country toward something that you want it to be? Satire does not change anything. Satire brings more people to the table to discuss certain topics that might not be available for serious discussion. It's the people who actually change the conversation. Satire is a catalyst. Bassem Youssef is an Egyptian satirist and former columnist. He canceled his television show, also broadcast on DW, in 2014, when the pressure from the Egyptian regime became too much and he had to fear for his safety. Before his TV career, Youssef was a cardiac surgeon. Permalink http://p.dw.com/p/1J6tm


'We are not the toys of the army' With elections coming up, an Egyptian blogger accuses the Supreme Court of the Armed Forces of enforcing military rule and cracking down on the media and the freedom of speech in the country. One of the battlegrounds in the upcoming elections is over the media, where journalists and bloggers are objecting to the military's censorship and control over the media. The blogger Saleh (real name withheld for security reasons), told Deutsche Welle about his disappointment with the Supreme Council of the Armed Forces (SCAF). Deutsche Welle: What are your concerns regarding the SCAF?  Saleh: Since the revolution in February, there are two different wishes in Egypt - the people's desire for a change, and the army's desire to keep the old order in place. How is that reflected?  I am a blogger and a consumer of media, so I can put my focus on that topic. The army controls the media and uses it for its own purposes. It is true nowadays you can write about topics which were taboo, but you still cannot criticize the SCAF. There were already some cases when army forces prevented the printing of newspapers. What is the difference between the current situation and pre-revolutionary Egypt regarding the freedom of press?  In some cases it got better, but in other cases it is much worse. Nowadays there's more use of Chapter 148 of the Egyptian law, which says if you insult the Egyptian parliament, the court, the state authorities or the army then you deserve a penalty. In addition, some publications received a warning from the SCAF telling them to avoid publishing any item related to the armed forces without first consulting with the "Committee of Moral Matters."  Mohamed Husein Tantawi, the head of SCAF  And what happens if you disobey?  A couple of my blogger colleagues, as well as a few journalists, were investigated and imprisoned. The blogger Michael Nabil Sanad was sentenced to three years in jail because he wrote about the army's methods of torturing prisoners. In his verdict, it was said he insulted the army. That is insane. In October, after the army fired at Coptic demonstrators near the TV building in Cairo, there were accusations that the media was responsible for the bloodbath.  There was a lot of anger about the TV channels, since they gave a totally wrong picture of the reality. The television reports said that a Coptic mob attacked the army, and they called for the decent citizens to go out to the streets and protect the armed forces. In reality, the army was shooting civilians. So I am asking: is that free press? Is that journalism? Was that a turning point in the public opinion toward media-army relations?  The turning point happened a bit later, when the SCAF appointed a governmental committee which announced the media's coverage of the event was flawless. That was absurd. When army generals and the minister of information started to praise the TV's journalistic work, it was clear something was fishy. The Egyptians are not willing to accept this kind of media anymore, not after the revolution, and that is one of the grounds for the current struggle against the SCAF. What is the Ministry of Information?  De facto, it functions as the censor of the government. Since the SCAF is in charge now, it actually functions as the military's censorship. That ministry was closed down after the revolution, but restored in July. That is more evidence that the army is trying to kill the revolution.  The military leadership has been accused of violating human rights  What's in store for Egypt now? The current demonstrations against the army are so important, they are even more important than the February demonstrations. We fight now over the future regime in our land - whether we will have democracy or a dominant military regime. What is the worst-case scenario in your opinion? To return to a corrupted regime based on fear and brutal power. Mentally, we are now back in January, facing the ultimate battle against the regime. Me, and many more Egyptians, will not agree with the current system which allows citizens to be brought to trial in a military court. We are civilians, not soldiers. The blogger Alaa Abd El-Fatah has been under arrest for over a month just because he refuses to be investigated by the military prosecutor. Many people are willing to follow his way. We are not the toys of the army, we demand rights as civilians and human beings. Interview: Adi Halfon Editor: Rob Mudge


Retrial for those accused in Port Said football stadium riot Egypt has ordered retrials for all 64 defendants accused in the February 2012 Port Said stadium riot, according to state-run newspaper Al-Ahram. Nine appeals from defendants were also rejected. The court's decision on Thursday means that 21 people sentenced to death - as well as 28 people found not guilty - for their involvement in the deadly football violence that killed 74 people will be retried. Seventy-three people in total were accused for their roles in the riots, including policeman and sports officials. Most of the people who died in the riots were crushed by panicked fans attempting to leave the stadium or were thrown or fell from the terraces following the match between the local side al-Masry and visiting Cairo team Al-Ahly on Feburary 1, 2012. After the final whistle, al-Masry fans invaded the pitch and started attacking visiting fans and players. Witnesses reported seeing fans being stabbed with knives and pushed from the top of the stadium. Controversial origins Exactly why the incident became so deadly remains disputed. Al-Ahly fans, whose Ultras played a front-line role in the street protest battles that helped topple longtime dictator Hosni Mubarak in 2011, accuse the Interior Ministry of instigating the bloodshed as an act of revenge. Among the charges for those implicated in the violence were premeditated murder, negligence and possession of weapons in connection with the riots. The initial verdict's announcement in Port Said led to clashes between local residents and police in which a further 40 people were killed. The Egyptian Premier League, the country's top flight football league, was suspended immediately after the Port Said disaster. It resumed again in 2013, only to go into hiatus once more following the June protests that led to former President Mohammed Morsi's overthrow. The league resumed play for the current season in December. dr/mkg (Reuters, dpa)


Italy-Egypt relations threatened by murky Cairo murder Egyptian investigators are making no progress in the case of an Italian student murdered in Cairo. And they're not being very helpful to their counterparts in Rome, either, Megan Williams reports. Leaders in Rome and Cairo are engaged in a diplomatic dance of subtle nudging, behind-the-scenes meetings, bold public demands and repeated promises of the truth as they navigate the political minefield in the wake of the mysterious murder of a young Italian in Egypt. Giulio Regeni, a University of Cambridge doctoral student researching independent labor unions in Egypt, disappeared on January 25, the five-year anniversary of the uprising that ended the autocrat Hosni Mubarak's three decades in power - a day on which the streets of Cairo were flush with security personnel. Nine days later, his half-naked and severely tortured body was discovered on the side of a highway leading out of the city. Regeni's parents, human rights groups and EU politicians have made it clear that they believe Egypt's secret service responsible for his murder. "We'll stop only once we get the truth," Italian Prime Minister Matteo Renzi said on Friday, adding "la vera verita": the real truth. Officials in Egypt claim that they're doing everything they can to facilitate Renzi's search for said truth. However, the lack of results in Egypt's own investigation into Regeni's death has led to mounting frustration across Italy, where many believe that a cover-up is underway rather than a quest for truth. Most recently, Egyptian officials refused a request from Italy for the numbers of mobile phone clients in the Cairo district where the 28-year-old had lived. And last week Egyptian investigators traveled to Rome for what became a two-day marathon session of closed-door meetings with their Italian counterparts. The Egyptians brought 2,000 pages of documents with them, but Italian prosecutors said key pieces of evidence were still missing Following the encounter, Renzi announced that he was recalling Italy's ambassador to Egypt for an "urgent evaluation." Enzo Le Fevre Cervini, the director of research and cooperation at the Budapest Centre for the International Prevention of Genocide and Mass Atrocities, says the recall marks a new phase in diplomatic relations between the countries. "Some may consider this move as a bluff," Le Fevre Cervini says, "but in my opinion it's strong indication that something more could happen." The fact that all of Italy's political parties back the move, he adds, allows the country to present a united front in its demands that Egypt stop stalling the investigation. Regeni had been studying labor movements as part of his Ph.D. work in Cairo 'A great leader' In a press conference after her son's body was returned to Italy, Paola Regeni said his face looked like it had had "all the evil of the world inflicted upon it." She added: "The only thing I recognized in Giulio was the tip of his nose." An autopsy in Italy found that Regeni had been tortured at intervals of approximately 12 hours for several days. The various versions of what happened to Regeni floated by Egyptian authorities and media have only served to bolster suspicions of a cover-up in Cairo. Initially, Egyptian police said Regeni had been hit by a car. Later, on March 25, Egypt's interior minister said the student had fallen victim to a gang that posed as police officers to kidnap foreigners. The minister reported that police had killed all four members of the gang - rendering their testimony impossible - but that officers had found Regeni's ID in the home of one member. Observers say such cases of disappearance and torture are chillingly common in Egypt - at least for Egyptians. According to Amnesty International, 474 people were "disappeared" there in 2015, many likely held in secret prisons. In that same year, there were 1,676 cases of torture, 500 of which ended in death. "It's clear from the level of violence exerted on Regeni [that it was] state-made torture," the Budapest Centre's Le Fevre Cervini says, adding that he has studied other cases of foreigners tortured in Egypt by intelligence operatives. Le Fevre Cervini says agents may have targeted Regeni because they believed that his research on trade unions had put him in touch with anti-government activists. The sluggish cooperation of Egyptian authorities has made the case a thorny one for Renzi. Since taking office two years ago, the prime minister has made a special effort to forge close ties with Abdel-Fattah el-Sissi, the general who ousted democratically elected Egyptian President Mohammed Morsi in the 2013 coup, and then was voted Egypt's leader in 2014. "Renzi called him a great leader, and the two were strategic partners in the Mediterranean to fight people smuggling and Islamic terrorism," says Steve Scherer, the Rome correspondent for the news agency Reuters. "This is a setback for Renzi, and it's something he's going have to handle very delicately." The partnership has become strained by the breakdown of Libya's government. Italy has aligned itself with the United States and Britain in backing a political solution via the "national unity government"; Egypt wants the West instead to lend support to Libyan National Army headed by General Khalifa Haftar. Italy's strong economic ties with Egypt - the hundreds of Italian companies with Egyptian contracts and the fresh deal between Egypt and Italy's state-controlled Eni energy company to extract gas in the sea off its coast - only raise the stakes. But Scherer says that if the case is proving troublesome for Renzi, it is all the more so for el-Sissi. "El-Sissi is having problems with his own administration - and that's a bigger issue," Scherer says. "[This case] reveals the ongoing fight between el-Sissi's security apparatus and the Interior Ministry." In a front-page editorial in Egypt's largest state-run paper, Al-Ahram, Editor-in-Chief Mohammed Abdel-Hadi Allam wrote that "the naive stories about Regeni's death have hurt Egypt at home and abroad - and justified some to judge what is happening in Egypt now to be no different from what went on before the January 25 revolution." As Italians and Egyptians continue to closely follow the case, many say it is unlikely that the full story of who is responsible for the atrocious murder of Giulio Regeni will ever be revealed. At best, they say, they'll get something close to the truth. But not la vera verita.


US voices alarm over power grab by Egyptian military Washington has expressed concern over the seizure of executive powers by Egypt’s ruling military council. The body has trimmed the powers of the winner of Sunday’s presidential elections, and dissolved parliament. Concern about recent events – described by critics of the Egyptian military as "a coup" - was voiced by both the US State Department and the Pentagon on Monday. The generals in charge of Egypt's transitional administration issued a "constitutional declaration" late on Sunday before the counting of ballots in the election even began. The council said it would maintain authority over the drafting of laws and a new constitution, with no civilian oversight of their budget and other affairs. The declaration also removes the title of "Supreme Commander of the Armed Forces" from the next president, removing his right to a say in the affairs of the military. Washington, which has long maintained close links to the country's military establishment, voiced concern over the move, and its timing. US State Department spokeswoman Victoria Nuland said the US was "concerned by decisions that appear to prolong the military's hold on power." "This is a critical moment in Egypt, and the world is watching closely," Nuland told a news briefing. "We call on the Supreme Council of the Armed Forces (SCAF) to restore popular and international confidence in the democratic transition process by following through on their stated commitments." US defence chiefs urge change The Pentagon - which is responsible for maintaining the close military links between the countries - also expressed anxiety about the timing. Press secretary George Little said the Pentagon urged the generals "to relinquish power to civilian-elected authorities and to respect the universal rights of the Egyptian people and the rule of law." Morsi has claimed victory, but opponents said he was trying to hijack the vote Doubts have been expressed in Washington about the prudence of continuing to give military aid to Egypt, in light of the SCAF's apparent reticence to transfer executive functions. For years, Egypt has received more than $1 billion in military aid from the US. The council has also dissolved the Islamist-led parliament following a ruling by the country's highest court last week. The country's rivals for the presidency - the Islamist Muslim Brotherhood's Mohammed Morsi and Mubarak's last premier, Ahmed Shafiq - both claimed victory in Sunday's runoff elections. The Brotherhood called for a mass protest on Tuesday and said it would take part in "all popular activities against the constitutional coup and the dissolution of parliament." Secular and leftist Egyptians fear that Morsi will pursue a religious, anti-liberal agenda, while Shafiq's critics claim he is a remnant of the old regime and a threatened a "second revolution" if he comes to power. rc/ (AFP, AP, dpa, Reuters)


Egypt's wrong turn After Hosni Mubarak was toppled power, Egypt seemed to be en-route to a new era. But the country is now more divided than ever, and democracy still a distant dream. What went wrong? The news coming out of Cairo these days is characterized by political battles, religious riots and economic downturn, and the transitional route to democracy appears to have hit a wall. Images of violence and chaos dominate reports from the city on the Nile, and could not be further from those of the excitement and euphoria that filled the nation in the immediate aftermath of Hosni Mubarak's demise. Back then many Egyptians thought they were standing on the threshold of a new era - one with greater freedom, more rights and enough bread for everyone. But that is not what happened, and many are now cursing the revolution, and asking "what went wrong?" The polarizing force of religion The military and the Muslim Brotherhood are often cited as contributing to the mistakes and failures of the transitional process. Political analyst Emad Gad from the Al-Ahram center in Cairo believes they got it wrong from the very beginning, in that rather than convening a constitutional assembly, as Tunisia did, the army and the Islamists pushed for early parliamentary elections. Egyptians followed this lead, and voted in favor of the ballot in the March 2011 referendum. Egypt then began its dance with democracy, without having first learned the steps. Worse than that, Gad says, is that the hurried poll divided society into the Islamists and secularists. And that polarization has characterized political discourse ever since. The role of religion is dominating the political discourse in Egypt The Muslim Brotherhood's political wing, the Freedom and Justice Party, which garnered almost 50 percent of votes in the parliamentary elections at the end of 2011, and whose presidential candidate, Mohammed Morsi was elected six months later as Egypt's first civilian head of state, put religion on the agenda from the outset. "In Egypt, religion is the easiest way to get votes," Gad says. "Forty percent of the population is illiterate, which means many are easy to influence." Failure to understand democracy Stephan Roll, Egypt expert at the German Institute for International and Security Affairs (SWP) is critical of both the Muslim Brotherhood's polarization policies, and of the opposition. "The secular powers want to rule on an equal footing, but in so doing, they render the election results obsolete." That said, he believes the Islamists see their victory at the ballot box as carte blanche to rule with absolute power. "Both sides clearly fail to understand the true meaning of democracy," Roll says. Since the landslide victory of the Islamists at the parliamentary elections, the political debate in Egypt has focused almost entirely on the role of religion in the constitution, the media and society. Revolutionaries' calls for social justice have been faded out and politicians are not beyond ignoring Egypt's economic issues. Roll says that until politicians learn to deal with pressing issues independently of more fundamental ones, the country cannot move forward. Resistance to the ways of old While the Egyptian opposition seeks to blame the Islamists for the economic stagnation and political status quo, the Islamists themselves say the current problems are a hangover from the former regime, and that followers of Mubarak's old regime are obstructing the path to progress. To what extent that is really true, is bitterly contested. Emad Gad says Mubarak's legacy lives on in the form of corruption, torture and nepotism, but that blaming his followers for the current ills of Egyptian society is more likely "an excuse by the Muslim Brotherhood, which is reluctant to reform." Mubarak's former Prime Minister Shafiq almost beat Morsi at the polls Roll, however, believes the extent to which the old system influences the new one is underestimated. Mubarak's regime was not only made up of two or three families, but was represented in the economic elite, the judiciary and the security apparatus. The fact that Mubarak's former Prime Minister, Ahmed Shafiq, won 48 percent of votes at last year's presidential elections could be seen to underscore that theory. So could the dissolution of the Islamic-dominated parliament, as ordered by Egypt's top judges. In search of a middle-man The lack of trust all round has almost brought the transitional process in Egypt to a halt, and many believe there will be no real progress until either an individual or a national institution steps in as a middle-man to bring the two sides to the negotiating table. And as there is no Egyptian Nelson Mandela in sight, many are looking to the military to breech the gap. But Emad Gad doesn't see them as the right people for the job. "The months under military leadership directly after Mubarak's collapse were a catastrophe," he recalls. "The generals were only interested in securing their privileges in the new era." Recently a group of activists said they had collected a million signatures calling for the military to take over again. Yet if the army really were to make a political comeback, Egypt's transition to democracy would be dead in the water.


Egypt - from protests to politics The uprisings in many Arab countries were initiated by young people, but many activists are finding it hard to cope with the political aftermath. The entrenched political elite still dominates. Nearly three years after the fall of the Mubarak regime, Egyptian politics are still dominated by the same, familiar faces. The three key figures in the current interim government – President Adli Mansour, Prime Minister Hasim al-Beblawi and Amr Moussa, head of the panel charged with drawing up a new constitution – have been around for a grand total of 221 years. Career diplomat Moussa was even politically active in the 1950s under then-president Gamal Abdel Nasser. In other countries in the region, the Arab Spring has a similar sheen: Tunisia's secular forces just recently nominated a 79-year-old to be the new prime minister. For its part, the Islamist Ennahda party chose the 88-year-old political dinosaur, Ahmed Mestiri, as its candidate. Egypt's panel for drawing up a new constitution is headed by Amr Moussa The handful of young revolutionaries who helped bring down the old regimes with mass protests are increasingly disillusioned by the continued dominance of the old guard. "The young ones have no experience," said one activist, who did not want to be named. "They have not benefited from the revolution because they didn't understand anything and let themselves be manipulated by the security forces and intelligence services." Lack of financing Under the Mubarak regime, it was not possible to develop a crop of young, independent political leaders. The regime gave the Islamist Muslim Brotherhood a limited amount of freedom, but any real opposition from the secular side has beem suppressed with a heavy hand. After the fall of the old regime, new liberal and left-wing parties founded by the younger generation already played no role in the country's first, free election just months after the revolution. Muslim Brotherhood leader and former Egyptian President Mohammed Morsi is in jail The young activist admitted that it was their own lack of experience and financial resources that left the movement sidelined. "Financing was a big problem. We had an office for our [Justice] party, but had to give it up because we didn't have enough money," he said. The 32-year-old has since left the party and withdrawn from active political life, only occasionally participating in protests against the army. Change from below Shihab Wagih, from the Free Egyptian Party, paints a more optimistic picture. The 29-year-old is spokesman and political trainer for the liberal party, which won 15 seats at the last parliamentary election. Wagih also works as a regional coordinator for the German Friedrich Naumann Foundation in Cairo. He, too, is dissatisfied with the slow pace of political change since the revolution, but views the old guard as only half the story. "There are young people getting involved in politics," he said. "We are seeing younger faces, even in leadership roles in some parties." Wagih points to the chairman of his own party, Ahmed Hassan Said, as one of the new generation of politicians. But more important than age is whether the person provides new ideas, dialogue, transparency and democratic values, he stressed. All of this, he said, is precisely what is lacking in the current transitional government, which doesn't listen much to outside voices. Internal quarreling Protests in Cairo flared up again at the end of December Wagih thinks that many activists join political parties for the wrong reasons. "Not everybody joins a party because they share the ideology. Sometimes people do it just because they feel like it," he said. "They say something, like, Mohammed el-Baradei is a nice guy, so I'm going to his party." Others are perhaps banking on some financial advantage or want to bask in the glow of a popular or well-known revolutionary. But, the chaotic phase the country has been going through since the fall of Mubarak has also made it difficult for new parties to get organized. In an effort to try to make the most out of the revolution, activists often find themselves standing in each other's way, says Wagih. The Tamarod (Rebellion) movement, which was a key instigator of Mubarak's demise, is currently struggling with an inner-party rebellion of its own. And there is not much time left to get the political forces lined up for the next parliamentary and presidential elections to be held sometime in 2014 after the new draft constitution is passed.


Egyptian intelligence center in Suez city Ismailia attacked A car bomb has exploded near an Egyptian army intelligence building in the Suez Canal city of Ismailia, wounding at least six soldiers. No group has claimed responsibility for the incident. The force of the blast caused part of the military intelligence building's outer wall to collapse about 120 kilometers (70 miles) northeast of the capital, Cairo. As heavy smoke rose from a building after the explosion, security personnel searching the area found another car bomb, which had not gone off, state media reported. "This is the latest in a series of cowardly terrorist attacks by extremist elements against the people of Egypt and army installations," military spokesman Colonel Ahmed Ali said in a statement. An attempt to assassinate the interior minister last month raised fears of a revenge campaign over the July 3 military coup that ousted Mohammed Morsi and his Muslim Brotherhood-led government. In September, the army launched a campaign against armed militants in Sinai, a desert region where the Bedouin population has long complained of neglect by several successive Egyptian governments. The turmoil has intensified since the army deposed Egypt's first democratically elected president and installed a new military-backed caretaker government in response to mass protests against the Muslim Brotherhood leader's rule. On Saturday, state media quoted General Abdel Fattah al-Sissi, the man who toppled Morsi, as saying that army and police forces had worked together to "confront terrorism and all those who try to create problems and incite strife between the children of this nation." Meanwhile, state media also reported that top security officials testified behind closed doors in Cairo in the retrial of former president Hosni Mubarak, who faces charges related to the killings of about 900 protesters during the 2011 uprising that led to his ouster. A court had previously convicted the former autocrat, now 85, of failing to stop the killings during the revolution, but Mubarak won an appeal earlier this year to return to court. mkg/rc (Reuters, AFP, dpa, AP)


Egyptians vote in final round of polls Egyptians lined up to cast their ballots on Tuesday in the final round of landmark post-revolution elections that, so far, have given Islamists the biggest share of the vote. Some 15 million eligible voters have been called upon to choose their preferred candidate for Egypt's first parliament since the ouster of President Hosni Mubarak last February. Polls will be open for two days in nine of Egypt's 27 provinces. The first two rounds of voting in December in the rest of the country saw the main Islamist parties claim an overwhelming victory. This last round of voting takes in regions of the rural south, which has the largest proportion of Christian voters, the Nile delta region north of Cairo and the restive Sinai desert in the east which has seen a sharp rise in Islamist militancy. The Muslem Brotherhood, viewed as the best organized political movement in Egypt, is widely expected to triumph in this week's polls. But the surge of Al Nour, which represents the ultra-conservative Salafist brand of Islam, has raised concerns among the country's increasingly marginalized liberals and Coptic Christians about civil liberties and religious freedom. Christians and liberals are worried they may be marginalized An Islamist victory also has Egypt's lucrative tourist industry worried that well-heeled Westerners may steer clear of the country in future. Ongoing tensions The ballot has been overshadowed by the deaths of 17 people late last month in clashes between the army and protesters demanding an end to the emergency rule of the military council. Voters turned out in record numbers for the first two rounds of balloting and international monitors said the elections were relatively free of irregularities, following the notoriously corrupt polls of the Mubarak era. But police raids on pro-democracy and rights groups last week, including one German foundation, have disrupted the work of Western-backed election observers and drawn accusations that the army was deliberately trying to weaken oversight of the vote and silence critics. The government has defended the searches as part of an investigation into what they claim has been illegal foreign funding of domestic political parties. Author: Gregg Benzow (AFP, dpa, AP, Reuters) Editor: Andreas Illmer


Jail term reaffirmed for Egyptian ex-premier An Egyptian appeals court has upheld a one-year prison sentence against Hesham Qandil, a former prime minister under deposed president Mohammed Morsi. The case stems from a 2011 ruling that a firm be re-nationalized. A one-year jail sentence imposed on former Egyptian prime minister Hesham Qandil in April was upheld by an appeals court in Cairo on Thursday. Qandil has not been seen in public since the massive crackdown on Islamists by Egypt's army-installed authorities that resulted in hundreds killed and more than 2,000 jailed. Cairo's Administrative Court ruled that Qandil, a technocrat appointed as premier in August 2012, must serve the jail term for failing to implement a 2011 court ruling to re-nationalize a textile company. The court also invalidated the privatization of the company, Tanta Flax and Oils, and reinstated dismissed employees. They had filed a lawsuit against Qandil for failing to repurchase the firm. It was sold to a Saudi businessman in 2005 by the former administration of ex-president Hosni Mubarak. Courts reverse Mubarak-era deals The jail term was originally imposed on Qandil in April, when was still premier, before the army's ouster of Morsi and its crackdown on the former president's Islamist supporters. At the time, officials in Qandil's then-government had said that re-nationalizing state enterprises was not straightforward and the company had been broken up since its sale. Egyptian courts have issued at least 11 rulings since the revolution that toppled Mubarak in 2011, ordering the state to reverse deals signed by the former president's administration. Activists and lawyers had said the companies were sold off too cheaply and were representative of corrupt business practices during the Mubarak era. The rulings have put a number of foreign companies operating in Egypt into legal limbo. Qandil's Cabinet was widely criticized in Egypt for failing to revive an economy in deep crisis after more than two years of political turmoil. Fatal shooting in Sinai Security sources in Egypt's volatile northern Sinai region said on Monday that gunmen had killed at least two policemen while on their way to work in the provincial capital of el-Arish. Attacks on Egyptian forces have surged in northern Sinai since Morsi's ouster. In response, security forces launched an offensive against militants in the Sinai three weeks ago. Last week, the army announced that more than 300 suspects had been arrested since early July. The area is of strategic importance because it borders Israel and flanks the Suez Canal, a key sea route between Asia and Europe. ipj/mkg (Reuters, AP, dpa)


Protesters clash with police on revolution anniversary Skirmishes have spread across Egypt's major cities on the second anniversary of the uprising that toppled Hosni Mubarak. Clashes between Morsi opponents and police have resulted in injuries and fatalities. Thousands of people took to the streets of the capital and other Egyptian cities on Friday to mark the day two years ago when protesters began demonstrations in Tahrir Square that eventually convinced President Mubarak to step down. Some protesters clashed with police on Friday, particularly on side streets leading towards the square. Police fired tear gas after some protesters had pelted them with rocks or petrol bombs. They also fired tear gas on Morsi opponents descending upon the presidential palace. Elsewhere in the capital city, there were reports of protesters blocking roads and metro stops. By late Friday, medical sources raised the number of injuries to an estimated 400 across cities where clashes had occurred. The unrest resulted in the death of at least five protesters in the city of Suez. In Alexandria, police were reported to have clashed with protesters who attempted to attack a local government building. In the coastal city of Islamilia, Morsi opponents attacked the local Muslim Brotherhood office. The violence first broke out late on Thursday when a group of protesters approached a cement wall erected to protect nearby government buildings in Cairo. Opposition leaders had called on supporters to take to the streets to express displeasure with the government of President Muhammad Morsi, a former member of the Muslim Brotherhood who is backed by the Islamist movement. The Muslim Brotherhood has kept a low profile on the anniversary, calling no rallies of its own but instead announcing a charitable and social initiative it has dubbed "Together we will build Egypt." President Morsi used a speech to mark the birthday of the Prophet Muhammad on Thursday to call on Egyptians to mark the event "in a civilized, peaceful way that safeguards our nation, our institutions, our lives." Tensions between the president and the opposition have been heightened since Morsi used a presidential decree to seize sweeping powers he said he needed to expedite the holding of a referendum on Egypt's new constitution. Following the referendum, in which voters approved the constitution, Morsi relinquished the extra powers. The opposition, however, reject the constitution in its current form, arguing that it does not provide sufficient protection for human rights. kms, pfd/dr (Reuters, AFP, dpa)


Egyptian judges recommend dissolving Muslim Brotherhood A panel of Egyptian judges has recommended dissolving the Muslim Brotherhood, which backed ousted president Mohammed Morsi. The judges' call follows a crackdown on Islamists by Egypt's army and interim government. The judicial panel told an administrative court Thursday to dissolve the non-governmental organization after opponents had challenged the Brotherhood's legal status and funding. The case was brought against the group in March, with the next session of the court hearing the case scheduled for November 12. The judges accused the Brotherhood of operating outside the law, and also recommended their Cairo headquarters be closed. The panel's decision is not binding. The Brotherhood was founded in 1928, but was formally dissolved by Egypt's military leadership in 1954. The group had run independent candidates in parliamentary elections, but formed their political wing – the Freedom and Justice Party – after ex-president Hosni Mubarak was forced out of office in Egypt's 2011 revolution. The Brotherhood subsequently captured majority seats in parliament and the Islamist Morsi won the country's presidency. Morsi, Egypt's first democratically-elected president, was ousted on July 3 in a military coup after mass protests calling for him to step down. Many leading Brotherhood officials have since been either arrested or face criminal charges of inciting violence – the same crime with which Morsi was charged on Sunday. Morsi himself is being held at an undisclosed location. At least 900 people, most of them Islamist supporters of Morsi, have been killed in protests against his removal from office. The Brotherhood has accused the "putschist regime" of attacking democracy and creating allegations of violence and terrorism as a means to justify the group's dissolution. The National Coalition for Legitimacy, which includes the Brotherhood, called for a "million-person march" under the slogan "The Coup is Terrorism" for Tuesday. dr/ipj (AP, Reuters, AFP, dpa)


Egyptians call for interior minister’s resignation Egypt's opposition has called on the interior minister to resign after a video showed security beating a naked man at a protest. Thousands have clashed with security as Egypt's political violence enters its ninth day. Footage of the beating was broadcast live during Friday's protests against Islamist President Mohammed Morsi. It has since gone viral, triggering condemnation on social media. Permalink http://p.dw.com/p/17X7b In the video, riot police use truncheons to beat the middle-aged man before dragging him onto an armored vehicle in front of the presidential palace. Interior Minister Mohammed Ibrahim has ordered an investigation to "hold accountable" the policemen who beat the naked protester, his office said. "This behavior has no justification," said Ayman Nour, who heads the opposition group Revolution Tomorrow. Strategy session The NSF was to meet later on Saturday to review its strategy after Friday's clashes between security forces and petrol-bomb throwing protesters killed one man and injured more than 50, according to Health Ministry figures. The death raises to nearly 60 the toll from violent protests that erupted across Egypt more than a week ago on the second anniversary of the anti-Mubarak revolt. Friday's lone death was a 23-year-old man shot in the chest and forehead, according to the Health Ministry. The group had called for a show of opposition to Morsi and his Muslim Brotherhood after deadly unrest swept Egypt last week, the worst violence since the president was elected in June. Hours before Friday's violence, NSF leader and Nobel Peace laureate Mohamed ElBaradei had suggested that unrest would persist if Morsi continued to sideline his opponents. The protests come a day after talks between rival political factions. The largest crowds marched through the Suez Canal city of Port Said chanting, "Leave, leave, Morsi," with thousands also rallying in Cairo's Tahrir Square. Earlier, Morsi had said that security forces would use "the utmost decisiveness to enforce the law and protect state institutions" and blamed the opposition for sparking the violence. mkg/pfd (AFP, Reuters, dpa, AP)


Egyptian police defend presidential palace Cairo's presidential palace was the scene of heavy clashes on Friday. Egyptian police forces shot live ammunition at protesters, and at least one protester was killed. Egyptians on the street say that it won't end there. Every few seconds the sound of a shotgun blast shot by Egypt's paramilitary police force can be heard. The atmosphere is tense. This isn't teargas that's being fired. This time the rounds are live, and the protesters know they could be putting their lives at stake. Two young men carry their wounded friend to an ambulance. His upper thigh took a few of the shotgun's pellets. But even in the ambulance, caution is taken. A few minutes earlier, a photographer said, the ambulance he was riding in was struck by shotgun pellets. Across the street from the emergency vehicle, 27-year-old Hazim sat on a curb. A gas mask lies next to him. "They set off tons of teargas, he said. "Something like five or seven shots all at once. They're also shooting at people with shot. Ten minutes ago they started shooting at us from the roof of a nearby building." Hazim said he saw four people firing down at the square. Pronouncements of force But the protestors, themselves, also appeared to have taken an aggressive stance. In contrast to previous demonstrations, this time they attacked the presidential palace in Cairo. Molotov cocktails flew over the palace wall, causing nearby trees to catch fire. Egyptian police retaliated with teargas. Police and protesters scuffle as protesters try to break through a gate of the presidential palace Early Friday evening (01.02.2013), President Mohammed Morsi and the Muslim Brotherhood gave nearly simultaneous statements. In his address, Morsi called for opposition parties to condemn the violent acts of protestors at the presidential palace. The Muslim Brotherhood demanded opposition parties instruct their followers to abandon the demonstrations. At the same time, Morsi's spokesperson announced that security forces would now defend government property with determination and force. A short time later police began shooting at demonstrators with shotguns. Opposition holds little control over demonstrators The Muslim Brotherhood and opposition parties announce the results of their closed-door meeting Yet the influence opposition parties have on protestors is marginal, Hazim said. "All the politicians and parties - they basically aren't connected to the people on the street. They think they are, but they aren't. When Mohammed ElBaradei or Hamdeen Sabahi [opposition party leaders] tell people, 'Go home!' the people say 'No!' because they're not the ones who bring people out onto the streets." A closed meeting that took place Thursday between the Muslim Brotherhood, Salafists and opposition parties has now been rendered meaningless. In it, all participants had declared their intent to, among other things, reject any form of violence in the political debate. But given the opposition's limited influence over demonstrators, that statement had little effect. Recently restarted dialogs are now considered dead, and the representative of the Muslim Brotherhood is once again holding opposition parties responsible for any violence. Hazim said he thinks protestors will only stop when the president steps down. They've had enough of the president's inaction, he said, and want to see some improvement. "Maybe the violence is a kind of reaction to Morsi's policies," Hazim said. "He does what he wants and doesn't listen to anyone. He says, 'Egypt is good, Egypt is beautiful,' just like he did when he visited Germany, totally ridiculous." Police pounce It is in the security sector that, above all else, action needs to be taken. Demonstrators clash with the police due to their hatred for state security forces. In the past, many Egyptians were exposed to the arbitrariness and brutality of the police and intelligence agents. Over the last two years more than a few Egyptians were witness to the deaths of friends or family as a result of police violence. A protester holds an Egyptian flag as he stands on Kasr El Nile bridge, which leads to Tahrir Square in Cairo The most recent act of unheralded violence from Egyptian police could also be watched on live Egyptian television on Thursday. A unit from the paramilitary police pounced on an unarmed 48-year-old man lying on the ground. They pulled the clothes from his body until he was completely naked, lying on the asphalt in front of the presidential palace. They then beat him with clubs and fists. When they were finished they dragged him to a police transporter in which he disappeared. Such scenes are the reason the revolution began in Egypt two years ago. Yet to this day many say the state security apparatus has not been reformed. Police officers who have committed crimes are seldom called to answer for their actions. Without the introduction of reforms, violent street clashes will continue.


Egyptian protests against Sissi presidential bid spark deadly clashes Clashes between protesters and Egyptian security forces have left several people dead, including a reporter. Islamist demonstrators were rallying against the presidential bid of ex-army chief Abdel-Fattah el-Sissi. Hundreds of supporters of former President Mohammed Morsi took to the streets of Cairo on Friday protesting the recent decision by the man responsible for his ouster, Sissi, to run for president. Rallies were held in several cities across Egypt, but it was the capital that saw the worst of the violence. At least four people were killed in Cairo, including Mayada Shraf, who worked for the privately-owned Al-Dustour newspaper and freelanced for the Masr Alarabia news website. She was shot in the head while covering clashes in the northeastern suburb of Ain Shams. Officials said the three other people killed Friday died in the same clashes. Nationwide demonstrations Hundreds of protesters supporting the Muslim Brotherhood, the organization that backed Morsi's bid for the presidency in 2012 and which has borne the brunt of the new government's anti-Islamist crackdown, demonstrated in cities around Egypt, including Alexandria. At the Al-Azhar Islamic university in Cairo, students threw Molotov cocktails and stones at police, who responded with tear gas to break up the crowd, security officials said. Ten Morsi supporters were arrested after clashing with security forces in Damietta, the officials added, and 28 more were detained in the southern Minya province for allegedly carrying leaflets hostile to the military and police. Sissi seeks presidency In his first interview since announcing his run for president, Sissi told the Egyptian al-Watan and Kuwaiti al-Rai papers Friday he was aware of the great responsibility before him, and would offer "a practical plan that could be implemented in reality on the short term." "The people bore a lot of the past few years and it's time to harvest the fruit of two revolutions," he said. Sissi resigned from his defense minister and deputy prime minister positions on Wednesday, enabling him to stand for the presidency. The 59-year-old faces no serious competition in the upcoming election. The presidential election is slated to be held before June. According to state news agency MENA, the electoral committee has announced a press conference for Sunday to present the timetable for the vote. Islamist crackdown The Muslim Brotherhood, which organized Friday's protest, has vowed to continue their protests against Sissi and what they call his "republic of fear." Police have killed hundreds of Islamist protesters and arrested around 15,000 protestors since Morsi's ouster last July. Earlier this week, 529 Morsi supporters were sentenced to death over deadly riots. "What we said nine months ago was confirmed and the mask fell off from the face of the coup leader … with the announcement of his candidacy to 'the bloody presidency'," it said in a statement Thursday. Sissi "broke the oath he made before the elected president Mohamed Morsi by toppling him and made the Egyptian army enter the political arena with him," the Brotherhood added. dr/jlw (Reuters, AFP, dpa, AP)


Egyptian train derailment kills several A train carrying Egyptian army recruits has derailed outside Cairo, killing several people. The tragic accident raises further doubts about Egypt's questionable transport safety record. A military train derailed close to the Egyptian capital, Cairo, on Tuesday, killing 19 people and injuring at least 107, a Health Ministry official said. "The Egyptian Ambulance Authority has sent 66 ambulance cars to the site of the accident to move the bodies of the injured and the corpses of the victims to hospitals," Health Ministry spokesman Ahmed Omar told Egyptian state news agency MENA. The train had been traveling from southern Egypt to Cairo when two of its carriages derailed just after midnight as it passed through the neighborhood of Badashreen in Giza, according to officials. The vehicle had conscripted youths on board at the time. Egyptian President Mohammed Morsi visited victims in the Cairo Military Hospital. "This is a sad day for Egyptians," Morsi said. "I send my condolences to the families of martyrs who were on their way to fulfill their national duty and my prayers to the injured for speedy recovery." The accident has sparked outrage over Egypt's transportation safety record. Hundreds of people staged a protest in Cairo's main railway station after the accident. "Be happy Mubarak," protesters chanted, referring to the president ousted in 2011's January revolution. "Morsi is continuing in your tracks." At a separate protest in the coastal city of Alexandria, police had to use tear gas to disperse hundreds of protesters who clashed with passengers when they tried to block trains from leaving the main station, a police official said. "Egypt's real tragedy is not about the affiliation of its rulers but rather their inability to manage the country," said Mohamed ElBaradei, an opposition leader. Egypt's much-neglected roads and railways have a worrying safety record, and the country has witnessed several deadly accidents over the years. In November, nearly 50 children died when a train crashed into a school bus south of Cairo. sej,dr/mkg (AFP, dpa, Reuters, AP) dw.de/news


Egypt still suffering two years on January 25 marks the second anniversary of the uprising in Egypt. Ibrahim Kenderian has been part of the movement since the very start and reports of violence, continued shortcomings and his expectations. Tahrir Square is blocked: barbed wire and sandbags on the roads are supposed to prevent attacks. On the once green square, protestors have again set up white tents. On the revolution's second anniversary, the spot is still the center of protests against the country's leadership. Today, though, this anger that swept Hosni Mubarak from power is aimed at the politics of the Muslim Brotherhood. Twenty-six year-old Ibrahim Kenderian was living in Alexandria on the "Day of Rage" as January 25, 2011 was termed. From that day on, the protests spread across the entire country. Ibrahim was drawn to the capital Cairo. On January 28, he was part of a growing protest march heading toward Tahrir Square. Along the way, violence erupted and resulted in one of the most bloody street battles of the revolution. Ibrahim Kenderian is disappointed by the Muslim Brotherhood "They used everything, like rubber bullets, tear gas or buckshot," Ibrahim said. "And then they drove into the crowds with their cars." One of the police vehicles drove over two young people right before his eyes. But the demonstrators saw that their numbers swelled and didn't give up until they had reached Tahrir Square. Many of them paid for their courage on this historic day with their lives. Recurring violence by authorities Mubarak's ouster did not end the government's violence against the Egyptians fighting for freedom and social justice. Violence runs through the past two years like a common thread to this day. Ibrahim also suffered from this bitter experience. About a year ago, he was arrested during a street battle. The police brutally beat him and criminals cooperating with the police stole his valuables. In the end, he was tortured for hours. "They pulled our arms out and beat us nonstop," he said. "In the end, I didn't realize how I was getting beaten anymore. Some people came and they said to us: you're going to be tortured again - and maybe you're going to be killed." Many Egyptians are protesting against Mohammed Morsi's politics Like many Egyptians, Ibrahim is disappointed by the developments over the past two years. Although Mubarak was overthrown, the military pushed out of day-to-day politics and elections held, the Islamists are in power now. They are restricting civil liberties, have divided the country deeply with the new constitution, but have hardly made any progress in reducing poverty. There is currently no hope for economic recovery. Ibrahim has nothing good to say about President Mohammed Morsi and the Muslim Brotherhood. "They're changing nothing, they can't do anything and they don't listen to anyone," he said. "And the people are dying - they just want to eat and live." Social system in a sordid state Just a few meters from the street where he was arrested a year ago, Ibrahim recounts a gas explosion which killed most of his building concierge's family. Returning from the hospital, he said what he saw there truly depressed him. There were no pillows, hardly any doctors, no food and it was very filthy. Hundreds of patients there had no care. "You have a minister of health. What is he doing?," Ibrahim said. "A lady I talked to there said, 'here it's good, there are other places which are even worse.' I said you have no doctors, you have no food, you have nothing. What's happening in the other places? I can't even imagine that this is Egypt." The Muslim Brotherhood's supporters are also taking to the streets But ironically, it is the absence of progress in Egyptians' daily lives which also gives Ibrahim some hope. Many people have realized that the Muslim Brotherhood were not the promised saviors and were not in the position to change the situation quickly, he said. "What is good is that they are derailing themselves with all of their mistakes - like Mubarak did," Ibrahim said. "So this is what is positive. I think that now is the time to find a leader for this revolution." The beginning of new protests? But here, too, little has changed in the past two years. The opposition rarely agrees on a position. It is only unanimous in its rejection of the Muslim Brotherhood, which it considers dangerous and incompetent. Ibrahim is also disappointed by the prominent opposition leaders such as Mohammed ElBaradei or Hamdeen Sabahi. ElBaradei in particular had once enjoyed full support by the revolutionary generation. But he never took the initiative or had a true vision for Egypt. Ibrahim views the second anniversary of the revolution mainly as a starting point for a new wave of protests. A growing number of Egyptians, rich as well as poor, are extremely dissatisfied with the Muslim Brotherhood's rule. "It's so dangerous what's happening now - it's like a nuclear bomb," he said. "And this nuclear bomb will come up on January 25, and on January 26, 27, 28 there will be a lot of violence and it will last until the end of the Muslim Brothers." It is by no means certain what will happen on this anniversary. Many Egyptians yearn for calm and stability and don't want any further unrest. But the pressure on the Muslim Brotherhood to improve the people's everyday lives has increased enormously.


Media Dialogue: A Facebook Revolution? The role of social and traditional media following the Arab Spring was the focus of a day-long DW Akademie symposium held at Deutsche Welle headquarters in Bonn. Had it really been a Facebook revolution? What role had online campaigns - including the Khaled Said campaign - played during the Arab Spring? And had social media created a sense of community? DW Akademie together with the Bonn-Rhein-Sieg University of Applied Sciences and the Cologne University of Applied Sciences invited 14 scholars from eight countries to discuss the media's role during transformation processes in the Arab world. Dr. Asiem El Difraoui, German Institute for International and Security Affairs Among those speaking at the third Media Dialogue was Dr. Asiem El Difraoui from the German Institute for International and Security Affairs in Berlin. His research looked at the relationship between traditional and new media in the so-called Arab revolution. Social unrest had sparked the revolution, he said, and not social media. "But," he stressed, "new networks played a major role in spreading information and quickly mobilizing the masses." Facebook as an alternative to offline activism? Omair Anas, from Nehru University, India Omair Anas from the Jawaharlal Nehru University in New Delhi, India, agreed. His paper questioned whether Facebook was an alternative to offline activism. He argued that it had expanded activism, citing the campaign protesting the killing of Khaled Said. The death of the young Egyptian had become a symbol for the revolution. When the uprisings began in January 2011, he said, the campaign had more "Facebook friends" than the TV news network Al Jazeera.  PhD candidate Moisés Garduño García from the University of Mexico examined the revolution from a linguistic angle. "The Arab Spring had its own messages, symbols and slogans to express the rise of a new era for the Arab world," he said. The revolution, he maintained, had not only changed the political framework but had influenced language as well. Michael Krzeminski, head of Hochschule Bonn-Rhein-Sieg "This was not a Facebook revolution," summarized Professor Krzeminski, dean of the Bonn-Rhein-Sieg University of Applied Sciences, as he brought the Media Dialogue to a close. The role of social networks in the Arab Spring, he said, needed to be understood "in relation to other media and, most importantly, in relation to cultural and political aspects."  The symposium papers will be published in book form later this year.


Egyptians protest against Muslim Brothers The largest demonstration yet against the power of the Muslim Brotherhood has not led Egyptian President Mohamed Morsi to compromise. Hundreds of thousands of liberal, left-wing and secular demonstrators streamed on to Tahrir Square in Cairo on Tuesday (28.11.2012). They came from all over the city for the largest demonstration against the Muslim Brotherhood so far. Some observers compared it to the very start of the Egyptian revolution in January 2011, but many protesters were apparently there for the first time - when a speaker asked who hadn't been there at the start of the protests, around two-thirds raised their hands. In the past, the upper middle class, who had so far not taken part in protests, were often called "felul" - by which people meant "leftovers of the Mubarak regime." Now, one of the speakers told the crowd, "We're sorry - when we say 'felul' we don't mean you, we mean the leaders of the old regime. Welcome to the revolution!" It was an attempt by the liberal protesters to motivate the non-Islamists to come out and demonstrate against the Brotherhood. Morsi won't compromise The protest's main demand was the reversal of President Mohamed Morsi's enabling decree. Some demonstrators limited themselves to its most controversial elements, such as the ban on a judicial review of Morsi's decisions. Many demanded the dissolution of the constituent assembly, which is charged with drawing up a new constitution and which is dominated by the Islamists. There were chants of "Down, down with the regime of the Muslim Brothers," and it was clear that the protests were increasingly against the whole idea of the Brothers' domination. The Brothers tweeted that there was 'low turnout' But President Morsi refuses to budge. His chief of staff announced that the decree would not be withdrawn, and he took the same uncompromising position over the make-up of the constituent assembly. The liberals continue to mistrust Morsi. In his election campaign, the president promised to reform the assembly so that more non-Islamists would be represented - but that reform was never carried out. In fact, his decree has made it impossible to dissolve the assembly. Brotherhood propaganda As hundreds of thousands gathered on Tahrir Square on Tuesday the Muslim Brothers tweeted, "Low protester turnout today indicates lack of support among Egyptians." Wagi Shehab, a leading member of the liberal Party of Free Egyptians, countered diplomatically, "The Muslim Brothers say the most extraordinary things. But the problem isn't the words, it's the deeds." Morsi refuses to back down But Morsi's opponents are anything but unified. Some of the demonstrators are former supporters of the military. Shehab admits that it won't be easy to integrate these new "revolutionaries" into the protest movement. As a politician, he's prepared to enter into an alliance with his former enemies if it's for the good of the country, he says, "but anyone who has seen his friend murdered next to him, and then sees the people who justified the murder now standing at his side, cannot accept this." Unpredictable More protests have been announced for Friday. Tahrir Square is still occupied and closed to traffic. Many people are worried by the increasing polarization between the Islamists and their opponents. The demonstrators maintain that they will not accept Morsi's decree, but at the same time, Morsi can't give way without losing face. Ronald Meinardus, head of the Cairo branch of the German Friedrich Naumann political foundation, insisted that Morsi is strong. "Morsi is not Mubarak," he told DW. "By the end, Mubarak was weak, but Morsi has the support of the Muslim Brotherhood, which won the election and has a legitimate membership." Morsi's government will not just collapse as Mubarak's did, he argued, and so the conflict will be tougher. All the same, the president and the Brotherhood have no interest in a violent confrontation. The economy has collapsed and Egypt has enough problems. A serious conflict would quickly make the Brotherhood unpopular. Parliamentary elections are scheduled for next year. Meinardus thinks the most likely scenario is a kind of "muddling through" with small concessions until the protests die down. But he too sees the current situation as unpredictable.


Egyptian judges condemn Morsi 'attack' Egypt’s top judicial body has accused President Mohammed Morsi of "an unprecedented attack" on the courts, with a constitutional decree to limit their powers. In Cairo, police clashed with protesters. The Supreme Judicial Council on Saturday condemned the new constitutional declaration and demanded that powers of constitutional oversight be restored to the courts. After an emergency meeting, the body expressed concern over Morsi's decision to replace the country's chief prosecutor and make presidential decrees immune to judicial review. "The new declaration is an unprecedented attack on the judiciary's rulings and independence," a statement from the assembly said. The council, responsible for the administration of the court system and the appointment of judges, urged Morsi to remove "anything that touches the judiciary" from the declaration. Morsi also bowed to a demand by protesters for the sacking of the prosecutor general, Abdel Meguid Mahmud. Mahmud has been blamed for acquittal of senior state officials on charges of orchestrating violence against demonstrators before Mubarak was ousted. Strike by judiciary As the council made its statement, the Judges Club of Alexandria announced a strike to protest against the changes. The group announced "the suspension of work in all courts and prosecution administrations in the provinces of Alexandria and Beheira... until the end of the crisis caused by this declaration," The judges would "accept nothing less than the cancellation of [Morsi's decree]," said Club chief Mohammed Ezzat al-Agwa, claiming that the president had violated the principle of separation of powers. In Cairo on Saturday, police fired tear gas at opponents of the presidential decree who were gathering for a planned one-week sit-in at the city's Tahrir Square. A core of activists had camped in the square overnight, with the police action coming as new demonstrators attempted to join them. By Saturday evening, some 30 tents could still be seen, with protests gathered around them. Opposition speaks out High-profile opposition leader Mohamed ElBaradei also said on Saturday that no dialogue with Morsi could be possible until the president rescinded the "dictatorial" decree, which, he said, gave Morsi the powers of a pharaoh. "There is no room for dialogue when a dictator imposes the most oppressive, abhorrent measures and then says 'let us split the difference'," ElBaradei told Reuters and Associated Press following talks with other members of the opposition. "I am waiting to see, I hope soon, a very strong statement of condemnation by the US, by Europe and by everybody who really cares about human dignity," he added. Meanwhile, Egypt's Muslim Brotherhood urged supporters of the president to show their approval for his decisions in a mass demonstration on Tuesday. rc/sej (AFP, dpa, Reuters)


Egyptian military gives government 48 hour ultimatum The Egyptian armed forces have given the government two days to reach an agreement with protesters, who want President Mohammed Morsi to resign. The news came shortly after several cabinet members stepped down. In a statement read on Egyptian state television Monday, the country's military called on the president and his government to reach a compromise with protest organizers, who have vowed to increase the already unprecedented demonstrations if he remains in power. Permalink http://p.dw.com/p/18zm0 If the government failed to comply with the military's request, armed forces officials would "announce a future roadmap and measures to oversee its implementation." The announcement came in response to pleas from government opponents, who had asked the country's influential military to intervene on its behalf. There was no immediate response from the president's office. Shortly before the televised statement, US President Barack Obama called on both parties to "show restraint" and on the government, in particular, to begin talks with its opponents. However, the US president refrained from taking a position on President Morsi's future role. The comments came during a press conference in Tanzania, where Obama began the last leg of his Africa tour on Monday. President Obama also drew attention to the treatment of women during the nationwide uprising. "For those who are participating in these protests or marches, assaulting women does not qualify as peaceful protests," he said. Government begins to unravel At least four cabinet members tendered their resignation on Monday following demonstrations over the weekend which had culminated in the ransacking and burning of the Muslim Brotherhood's headquarters in Cairo. The heads of communications, environment, legal affairs and tourism relinquished their offices, according to Egyptian state media on Monday. Earlier in the day, Tamarod - the protest organizer group whose name means "rebel" in Arabic - issued an ultimatum for Morsi, the country's first freely elected president, to resign by Tuesday at 5:00 p.m. local time (1500 GMT). If he failed to do so, the group would begin a "complete civil disobedience campaign." Tamarod has driven most of the opposition protests across Egypt including Sunday's rally, which drew hundreds of thousands of people, demanding that Morsi step down on the first anniversary of his inauguration as president. Critics accuse Morsi of ignoring the goals of the revolution that toppled ex-President Hosni Mubarak, cracking down on dissent and imposing Islamist values. Protest organizers claimed to have collected 22 million signatures over the weekend calling for the president to leave office and pave the way for new elections. The public outcry against the government has remained largely peaceful. However, health ministry officials reported at least 16 fatalities on Sunday resulting from clashes between Morsi opponents and supporters. Morsi has said he will not step down and that street protests cannot overrule the results of a free election. kms/mz (AP, AFP, Reuters, dpa)


Saudi rulers fear Egypt's fate The royal family in Saudi Arabia is anxiously watching Egypt, as clashes between the Muslim Brotherhood and the country's military continue. The conflict underscores that religion and revolution can go hand in hand. It is unlikely that there will be a revolution in Saudi Arabia anytime soon, at least according to many Middle East observers. The London-based Arabic newspaper "Al Sharq al Awsat" wrote that the patriarchal system remains in effect in the country, where obedience to its ruler and preservation of the status quo are cherished values. But since the Arab Spring of 2011, a dominant theme throughout the region has been that Islam can be a catalyst for seeking political change. As Egypt continues to grapple with the process, the Muslim Brotherhood has come into its own among the competing political forces - a development that is raising eyebrows among Saudi Arabian rulers. Religion and revolution But Saudi Arabia is hardly confronting religion's wild and anarchic element for the first time. In some ways, today's political climate echoes recalls November of 1979, when an armed group of Islamists stormed the Great Mosque of Mecca, the central sanctuary of Islam. Juhayman al-Otaybi, leader of the hostage takers and former national guardsman There, they took several thousand pilgrims as hostages and demanded an end to the Saudi royal dynasty and the Islamic rule of law. Despite the release of many of the hostages, the Saudi royal family issued a strong response. Troops surrounded the mosque and a two-week battle ensued that ultimately left around 330 dead. After several weeks, order was restored, and 70 of the hostage takers were executed, including their leader and a former national guardsman, Juhayman al-Otaybi. Mistrust of the Muslim Brotherhood The Saudis may now regard the Egyptian Muslim Brotherhood as a potential threat to their power. The Islamic political party came to power in Egypt's 2012 elections after the fall of former president Hosni Mubarak. Nearly a year later, the Brotherhood and Mubarak's successor as president, Mohammed Morsi, were themselves ousted by a popular movement that enjoyed the backing of the Egyptian military. Saudi Arabia has publicly announced financial support for the Egyptian military's actions. Supporter of a stable order: King Abdullah (l) and Hosni Mubarak That show of support suggests even the Muslim Brotherhood's temporary success is enough to worry the Saudis. Egypt's wing of the Islamic political organization embodies a mix of religion and politics that might be enough to challenge Saudi Arabia's status quo one day. After all, the coup against Morsi has radicalized many within the Muslim Brotherhood, said Maha Azzam, political scientist at the London Chatham House in an interview with DW. The Muslim Brotherhood was founded in 1928 as a resistance movement against the perceived immoral tendencies of the West, relates Middle East expert Christian Wolff of the University of Erlangen-Nuremberg. He told DW that the movement was also directed against a number of theological positions within Islam, explaining, "It deliberately isolated itself from the teachings of the traditional Ulama, which always conformed to the current ruling regime." However, the Brotherhood sought not only a new approach to theology but to the societal order as a whole, Wolff said. "For this purpose, they acted on the authority of modern Islamic teachings. That's how they ended up in opposition to Wahhabi Islam, which is Saudi Arabia's state religion." It was in the 1980s, however, that the political and ideological movement really gained momentum. This shift depended in part on the decline of the Marxist and nationalistic doctrines upon which many Arab oppositional movements were based. As those doctrines' influence faded, an ideological vacuum arose that was quickly filled with various approaches to Islam. But one exception along the way continues to be the strict and conservative school called Wahhabi Islam. Modern social criticism on the rise Upholding traditional values remains widespread in Saudi Arabia Elements of modern socially critical thought have made their way into the contemporary Islamist protest movement. Among those elements is the idea of questioning the ruling class' legitimacy. That offers another reason why the conservative Saudi royal family may be worried. "Saudi Arabia is a monarchy and justifies this monarchy theologically as well," said political scientist Wolff. According to him, the Muslim Brotherhood favors a different concept. "In its political thinking, the Muslim Brotherhood has absolutely reached a point of political modernism and appreciates the idea of governments gaining legitimacy through the people. This is exactly what Saudi Arabia doesn't like." Increasing social pressure in Saudi Arabia The Saudi royal family's fears are exacerbated by current social and demographic changes. More than one fifth of Saudi Arabia's 27 million residents are made up of foreign workers, mostly from South East Asia. Almost half of the population is younger than 25 and well informed about world affairs thanks to digital media. Meanwhile, existing welfare programs are not enough to keep roughly one quarter of the population from living in poverty. "This is why the social pressure is certainly more noticeable these days than in the past," said Wolff, who notes the Saudi population knows that citizens of other countries enjoy more civil liberties. Many Saudis have also observed how revolution and protests can overthrow a regime. The question that will occupy the country's royal family in the coming months, and perhaps years, is how to deal with the effects these developments could have at home.


'Irhal!' shout Egyptian protesters, telling Morsi to 'leave' Millions of Egyptians have taken to the streets in Cairo and beyond to demand an end to Mohammed Morsi's presidency. While the demonstrations were largely peaceful at Tahrir Square, they turned violent elsewhere. Cairo is in upheaval. Well into the night, millions of anti-Morsi demonstrators flooded into the streets of the Egyptian capital, including the rich, poor, old, young, revolutionaries, military supporters, men and women - veiled and unveiled. Other places saw protests as well. At least five people died in clashes between anti-Morsi protesters and supporters in two southern Egyptian cities, according to local media. Many demonstrators in Cairo shouted "Irhal!", meaning "leave" in Arabic. A large number of homemade red signs could be seen, along with Egyptian flags and crossed out portraits of the president - the symbols of the country's new revolutionary wave. Unity could be observed among Egypt's non-Muslim groups. Gone are the days when each party came with its own flags and banners. The message is clear, said a 16-year-old high school student demonstrating in front of the presidential palace: Morsi must go. Permalink http://p.dw.com/p/18yjL Festival-like atmosphere On one hand, there were elements of a party mood. People laughed and joked with one another. Colorful vuvuzelas and whistles caused deafening noise. Vendors sold fruit or grilled corn on the cob from hand carts. But at one of the gates to President Morsi's palace, it was nevertheless clear that the celebratory atmosphere had its limits. Hundreds of young people could be seen climbing onto the heavy metal containers that had been positioned in front of the palace's walls as a barricade, stamping loudly with their feet on the rusty iron and generating a monotonous thunder that could be heard throughout the area. As if in a trance, people waved Egyptian flags and shouted, "Leave!" Protesters wanted to show that they have resolved not to tolerate the Muslim Brotherhood's politics any longer. Millions had already taken to the streets on the anniversary of the revolution, but this time, it's clear that the goal is to topple Morsi as president. Amr Shavy is among those calling for his resignation. "I will continue to demonstrate and insist that he step down. Everyone here agrees and wants to stay until he goes. In my family, we're all in agreement. And if I go now, then someone else from my family will just replace me," he said. The mood at the demonstrations ranged from cheerful and celebratory to dark and violent Views differ when it comes to how demonstrators could end Morsi's presidency. Ali Saiyid, a 35-year-old teacher, supports peaceful protests. If that doesn't work, he says, then a civil disobedience campaign around the country must be started. That's exactly what members of the April 6 Youth Movement, one of the most influential revolutionary groups for young people, officially called for on Sunday. Ali Saiyid openly calculates with a military intervention. In his view, the army would not permit the country to come to a standstill for long and would ultimately take power back from the Muslim Brotherhood. Many demonstrators have a fairly positive attitude toward the army. Slogans suggesting an alliance between the people and the military could be heard repeatedly from the palace. As a military helicopter circled over demonstrators during the night, the protesters targeted it with hundreds of green laser pointers and broke out into jubilatory cries, while some applauded. However, not everyone was cheering. Many of the young activists who suffered under the military regime that took power after the revolution took a more skeptical view. 40-year-old Salma is among them, saying, "I am not against the military. It should assume power - but only temporarily during the transitional phase through to a presidential election without voter fraud. The army is necessary to protect the country, but not to rule it." Prepared for violence There are also those ready to take a violent course among the demonstrators at Tahrir Square. Accompanied by loud cheers and cries of "Leave!", some protesters unrolled an enormous banner down a house façade located near the presidential palace. The sign bore a crossed out image of Morsi's face along with the words, "You have ruled this country, but you were unjust, and that's why you will be executed!" Salma also sees the possibility of violence ahead. "It can definitely get violent, but the violence will come from the Muslim Brothers. We hope that God will protect us and the young people here. Even if the Muslim Brothers have weapons, there are more of us than of them." However, attacks at the Muslim Brotherhood's central headquarters in Cairo overnight prove that violence is also coming from other parties. The building was set on fire. The police did not intervene after having repeatedly announced they would not be keeping watch over Muslim Brotherhood facilities.


Blogger's death set off protests against Egyptian repression The Facebook group "We are all Khaled Said" was one of the driving forces behind mobilizing protesters in Egypt. Deutsche Welle honored the group's organizers and members in its international Weblog award the BOBs. As he did so often, Khaled Said was sitting in an Egyptian Internet cafe. But on this day in June 2010, a pair of men entered the room and asked him for his ID. The men were secret police, and the 28-year-old blogger and computer specialist wouldn't meet their demands. Witnesses later said the men took him out of the cafe and slammed his head against walls before taking him, unconscious, to a police station. By the time he arrived, all that could be said with certainty was that Said was dead. To avoid being held responsible for their crimes, the police, according to Egyptian media reports, stuffed hash into his mouth in an effort to make Said look like a drug dealer. The police also accused Said of theft, dodging mandatory military service and sexual assault. Said's abused body was then dumped in front of the cafe from which he'd been dragged. Mother of a martyr It was a day Said's mother, Leila Marzouk, will never forget. In addition to the sorrow of losing her son, she and her family watched officials drag their names though the mud. Her accusers knew they had to tarnish Said's reputation - and his family's.  Said's sister and mother said he would have wanted to help organize protests had he lived "My husband died when Khaled was six years old," Marzouk told Deutsche Welle. "I had to raise Khaled the best I could, and I always did what was right and good. Then they come and say, 'You failed at raising your child.'" Said died on June 6, 2010, more than six months before former president Hosni Mubarak's regime fell. But Said is still regarded as a martyr and symbol of the Egyptian revolution. But it wasn't only his death that led to indignation. Shortly after his death, reports surfaced that gave his murder a political dimension: the blogger published hidden camera footage documenting police corruption. The alleged reason he was taken out of the cafe and killed quickly spread across the Internet. Photos of a young man next to his disfigured corpse became a symbol of the Mubarak regime's repression. In Alexandria, where Said was born, demonstrations began just days after his death. Online organization Though she said she remains proud of her son, Marzouk added that it was a strange situation.  Photos of Khaled, alive and dead, were common in Egyptian protests  "A lot of young people took to the streets chanting 'down with Mubarak, down with [interior minister] Habib Al-Adli,'" she said. "I asked the people, 'What does this have to do with my son's death?' and they told me, 'We're making sure for you that Khaled gets his rights.'" Wael Ghonim, the Internet giant Google's head of marketing for the Middle East, was one of Said's friends and a leading Internet activist. Using a pseudonym, he and some friends started a Facebook group and, in honor of Said, gave it a name that summed up many young Egyptian's feelings: "We are all Khaled Said." Hundreds of thousands of people joined the group, and over a period of months it grew to become one of the Egyptian opposition's most important platforms to mobilize people to take action aimed at removing the government. The group documented human rights abuses committed by state authorities, helping activists exchange information and plan demonstrations after the Tunisian uprising was successful in forcing former president Ben Ali to flee the country in January 2011. Democracy's price Today, the Facebook group's original Arabic version has nearly 1.5 million members and remains a popular spot to debate the issues coming up as Egypt works to make the difficult transition toward creating a true civil society. An English Facebook group with more than 100,000 members also supports uprisings in other Arab countries, including Syria and Libya.  The Facebook group was an important resource for informing and organizing protesters  "We are all Khaled Said" won the 2011 Deutsche Welle International Blog (The BOBS) award in the Best Social Activism Campaign category. The competition's jury members said the group and its members had played an important role in achieving political change in Egypt. Khaled Said's sister Zahraa said she is proud that the group named in honor of her brother won the award. "I think Khaled would have liked to have been among the founders of such a Facebook group," she said. "And he certainly would have found someone else to dedicate it to. He was someone who liked things like that. That's just the way he was." Author: Salah Sharara / sms Editor: Stuart Tiffen


Timeline of the revolution in Egypt Since the middle of January, Egyptians have demonstrated for political change and, finally, successful brought the the regime of President Hosni Mubarak to an end. The timeline of an Arab revolution. Early January, 2011 Inspired by the Jasmine Revolution in Tunisia, activists in Egypt call upon the people to join in demonstrations. They want to protest against poverty, unemployment, and corruption - and against the 30 year reign of President Hosni Mubarak. An Egyptian attempts to set himself on fire before the parliament in Cairo. January 25 The "Day of Rage." Thousands demonstrate in Cairo against the Mubarak regime. They march to the party headquarters of the ruling NDP, to the foreign ministry, and to the state broadcaster. The demonstrators become entangled in violent clashes with security forces; security forces deploy tear gas and water canons against the demonstrators. Demonstrations also occur in other Egyptian cities. The Interior Ministry reports that three demonstrators and one police officer died. Ministry officials accuse the banned Muslim Brotherhood for instigating the unrest. January 26 The protests continue but the state rules with an iron fist: At least two people die. A spokesperson for US President Barack Obama warns the Egyptian government that it must recognize the universal rights of the demonstrators. January 27 The stock market in Cairo plummets as protests continue. Nobel Peace Prize recipient Mohammed ElBaradei arrives in Cairo and declares that he is ready to lead the opposition through a transition of power. The social networks Twitter and Facebook, which the demonstrators used to organize protests, are blocked. January 28 In expectation of massive protests in connection with Friday prayers, the government cuts Internet and mobile phone connections. ElBaradei is put under house arrest and the military enters the cities where they are greeted by cheering demonstrators. January 29 Mubarak appoints a new government. For the first time in his 30 year reign, Mubarak names a vice president: Secret Police Chief Omar Suleiman. The demonstrators in Tahrir Square successfully defend themselves against attempts by the military to disperse them. In Berlin, the heads of government of Germany, England and France say they are deeply worried about the situation. January 30 Plunderers, arsonists, and robbers terrorize the population. Prisoners break out of jail with help from the outside. Among the escapees are hardened criminals and Islamic extremists. The Muslim Brotherhood makes a statement for the first time demanding that Mubarak step down and a new national unity government be formed. January 31 Mubarak rejects demands that he step down. At the same time, he orders his head of government, Ahmad Schafik, to introduce reforms. The demonstrators defy roadblocks and continue to occupy Tahrir Square. They call for a "March of a Million" and a general strike for the following the day. The television broadcaster Al-Jazeera announces massive disruptions to its coverage. Israel calls on the world to hold back on criticizing Mubarak and to ensure regional stability. February 1 The "March of a Million" brings the power struggle to boiling point. Mubarak announces in a televised address to the nation that he will not run for another term as president. This concession does not satisfy the opposition. Around midnight, street battles erupt with Mubarak supporters.  Tahrir Square has been the epicenter of the protests  February 2 Mubarak supporters ride on camel and horseback into the crowd occupying Tahrir Square. Heavy street battles break out. The army, stationed on the square with tanks, stays out of the fighting. There are dead and hundreds of injured. During a telephone conversation, Barack Obama calls on Mubarak to begin the transition to democracy without delay. Internet access is restored. February 3 In the early hours of the morning, the situation on Tahrir Square comes to a head. Shots are heard, Molotov cocktails and stones are thrown, cars burn. February 4 Hundreds of thousands collect peacefully on Tahrir Square for the so-called "Day of Departure." The US government supposedly speaks with Egyptian government officals about an immediate resignation by Mubarak. The EU heads of state and government call for an immediate change of government February 5 Thousands of demonstrators continue to occupy Tahrir Square peacefully. Reports tallying the number of dead vary. The United Nations reports 300 dead. High party functionaries resign. The rumor circulates that Mubarak could go to Germany for "medical treatment." Berlin later denies the rumor. February 6 Banks open for the first time in days and traffic police patrol the streets of Cairo again. February 7 Tahrir Square remains occupied by the demonstrators and develops into a tent city. The previously arrested activist Wael Ghonim, a Google manager, is let free. Many see him as a potential leader of the fractured opposition February 8 The masses on Tahrir Square swell to the largest demonstration yet. The protests remain peaceful. The US increases pressure on Mubarak and UN Secretary General Ban Ki Moon pushes for a swift change. February 9 The trade unions begin to participate in the protests. Strikes occur all over the country. Egyptian Foreign Minister Ahmed Aboul Ghiet warns in an interview that the army could intervene in order to protect the country against a seizure of power. February 10 In a highly anticipated televised address, Mubarak declares he will delegate some powers to Vice President Omar Suleiman. Mubarak's expected resignation does not occur. However, Mubarak says he will not run in the elections planned for September. The demonstrators in Tahrir Square react with rage and disappoinment. February 11 After demonstrators expand their protests to other parts of Cairo, large numbers of Mubarak opponents assemble in front of the presidential palace as well as the state television building. The army says it will guarantee free and fair elections and calls on the people to return to normalcy. In the late afternoon, news reports say that Mubarak has left Cairo and is resigning his post. Author: Matthias von Hein/ sk Editor: Jennifer Abramsohn


Egyptians gather in Cairo to have their say on Morsi Supporters of Mohammed Morsi are rallying in Cairo ahead of opposition-led protests on June 30. Egypt's liberal and secular opposition has rejected the president's call for dialogue, instead demanding early elections. In two days, Egypt's presidential palace will serve as the focal point of opposition protests. According to the opposition, a petition called Tamarod, which demands Morsi's dismissal and early elections, has collected up to 20 million signatures - several million more than put the president in the office he assumed last June 30. During Friday's sermon at a main mosque in Cairo, the cleric warned congregants - many of whom support the Islamist Morsi - that, should protesters succeed, "there will be no president for the country" and Egypt will descend into "opposition hell." On Wednesday, Morsi gave a two-and-a-half hour televised speech acknowledging mistakes during his year in office. The president also called for national reconciliation, saying that he was open to cooperating with the opposition on constitutional reform. By Thursday, the opposition said Morsi had failed to take responsibility for Egypt's political polarization and weak economy. 'Moment of truth' On Friday, Germany's foreign minister called Egypt's escalation a "moment of truth." Guido Westerwelle underlined that demonstrators had a right to peaceful assembly and urged both sides to refrain from bloodshed after one activist was killed overnight, his spokesman said. Westerwelle "is deeply concerned about the current escalation in political tensions in Egypt," the spokesman, Andreas Peschke, told reporters. "What Egypt needs above all are reforms so that the economic situation will improve and people have real future prospects," he added. "That must be, in our view, the goal of all politicial forces in Egypt." The German foreign minister urged Egyptians to "prevent any outbreak of violence," Peschke said. Not giving in Cairo's ancient Al-Azhar academy warned Friday of "civil war." The religious authority, which has traditionally maintained a distance from the political establishment, also urged opponents of Morsi to accept his offer of dialogue rather than pressing on with plans for demonstrations. Opposition leaders have already dismissed Morsi's offer as insufficient and disingenuous. Mohamed ElBaradei, the head of the opposition National Salvation Front (NSF), had told reporters in Cairo on Thursday that the opposition "remained determined to call for an early presidential election to bring about the objectives of the revolution, with social justice foremost among them." Later on Thursday, rival demonstrators clashed overnight outside offices of the Muslim Brotherhood's political arm, the Freedom and Justice Party (FJP), on whose platform the president had won election last year. The FJP announced on its website that one of its supporters had died in the clashes, which also injured 30 people, the Health Ministry announced. Clashes linked to the political tensions have killed a total of five and wounded scores in the recent days. The army has urged both sides to reconcile and has warned that it could step back in to impose order if violence spins out of control. Morsi and the Brotherhood accuse loyalists of the old regime of being behind violence and of thwarting their efforts to reform an economy hobbled by corruption. Dissidents accuse the Islamists, who have won a series of elections against a diffuse opposition, of seeking to entrench their power and impose religious rule. mkg/kms (Reuters, AFP, dpa, AP)


Egypt: The Bloggers and the Revolution DW-AKADEMIE invited Arab and German bloggers to Cairo in October 2010 to discuss freedom of expression and censorship. Three months later bloggers organized resistance to the Egyptian regime. “I almost died three times during the uprising,” reports Egyptian blogger Eman Hashim. “Now that we have access to the Internet again in Egypt I’m trying to use my ‘electronic voice’ – my blog – as effectively as possible. I write about the missing activists, for example, and about corruption.” Eman Hashim took part in the 2010 Young Media Summit held in Cairo and organized by DW-AKADEMIE and the Deutschland-Zentrum Kairo. The conference focused on the dialogue between young Arab and German bloggers. Before former President Hosni Mubarak’s regime was overthrown, Eman Hashim used her blog to write about Egyptian politics and women’s rights. “The blogs in Egypt became really important after the government shut down all other ways of expressing one’s opinion.” Eman Hashim A study by the Arabic Network of Human Rights Information (ANHRI) confirms that Egypt has the most active blogging community in the Arab world. Mubarak’s regime had tried to intimidate bloggers through arrests and interrogation. Still, even during the Young Media Summit in October 2010, another participant – Egyptian blogger Tarek Amr – felt it was just a matter of time before the drive for freedom left the “virtual” world and sprung over to the “real” one. He was right. Today Amr says, “During the demonstrations the blogs reported about events that were neglected by the official media. At the same time the blogs and social networks were forums for exchanging ideas about planned campaigns. The Internet became a place where people were mobilized.” Tarek Amr Eman Hashim hopes that Egypt will become a freer country where people can express their opinions and fight for their rights. “The media have to become financially and politically independent. Access to the Internet has to be independent so that the government can’t shut down any online sites or blogs.” Despite many demands that remain open and her country’s uncertain future, blogger Hashim says the past several weeks have been the best in her life. “I’m enjoying the freedom we Egyptians have. We all connect with each other as if we’ve always known each other – and that’s because we’re free.”


Egypt on the brink of collapse? Since the ousting of President Morsi, Egypt has been in a state of chaos. The Muslim Brotherhood rejects the newly appointed head of the interim government and plans for new elections. When Mohammed Morsi sought election, he promised to be a president who would represent all Egyptians. But he was unable to unite the various political forces in the country, according to Amr Hashim Rabea, an Egyptian political scientist at the Al-Ahram Center for Political and Strategic Studies (ACPSS) in Cairo. In view of the country's disastrous economic situation, he said, it was necessary to unite all forces to push ahead with reconstruction. Interim president Adly Mansour will govern Egypt only until the next election. Both he and the next freely elected president face a major challenge: They need to unify a divided nation. Egypt without the Muslim Brotherhood? Supporters of the "Tamarud" (Rebellion) movement claim to have collected more than 20 million signatures against Morsi, arguing they no longer wanted to be governed by the Muslim Brotherhood. But can there be an Egypt without them? The Egyptian military is showing a strong presence since President Morsi's ousting The Muslim Brotherhood is firmly anchored in Egyptian society and its candidate Mohammed Morsi won the election in 2012 - albeit a low turnout - with 13.2 million votes. "At the moment, it is not going to be easy to integrate the Muslim Brotherhood in the political process," said Rabea. The positions appear deeply entrenched, and the conflict between the Muslim Brotherhood and the military is escalating daily. In recent days, dozens of people have been killed in street battles. "There is enormous anger and huge frustration within the Muslim Brotherhood, and that suppresses any thoughts it might have about its own mistakes," said Volker Perthes, a Middle East expert and director of Germany's Institute for International and Security Affairs (SWP). But this will surely end, he added, if the military is able to ease the tension. Although the military promised restraint in reshaping the country's political institutions when it took control, it simultaneously closed the headquarters of the Muslim Brotherhood and continues to hunt for leading Islamic leaders. Warnings of a civil war Currently, Egypt has no neutral mediator. And all parties, including that of the Salafists, have withdrawn from talks to form an interim government. "Political Islam has been dealt a serious blow," said Perthes. "And this has certainly weakened the Muslim Brotherhood." Violence has risen in recent days But the Brotherhood doesn't intend to accept that perception. It has called for an uprising, warns of a civil war and is presenting itself as unforgiving. Videos are circulating in the Internet showing Muslim Brotherhood supporters speaking of nationwide attacks if Morsi is not reinstated. Perthes assumes the violence will continue to escalate. "But it doesn't have to stem from the Muslim Brotherhood; it could come from other forces close to the Brotherhood, such as the Gamaa Islamiya, which has a terrorist past," he said. In recent years, however, the group has restrained from attacks, viewing the election of an Islamist president as an alternative. National security at risk Still, Egyptians remain concerned that the Muslim Brotherhood could become radical and hinder the country's reconstruction. "In the future, there will be parts of the Muslim Brotherhood that will turn to violence," said Perthes. "But there will also be parts that say 'we need to establish a modern party that is clearly committed to democracy.'"


Thousands gather for funeral of Copts killed in Egypt clashes Thousands marched in the Egyptian capital on Monday evening following the deaths of at least 26 people in clashes between Coptic Christians and the military. The violence has cast a shadow over upcoming elections. Cairo's Coptic Cathedral was filled with mourners Monday evening at the funeral of 17 Christians killed in clashes with security forces. Thousands of people marched from Cairo's main cathedral to the Coptic hospital on Monday evening, a day after at least 26 were killed in unrest between Coptic Christians and the military. Most of those wounded in Sunday's clashes are being treated at the hospital. The marchers called for religious unity and the removal of the head of the ruling military council, Field Marshal Mohamed Hussein Tantawi, accusing him of turning a blind eye to similar protests held by strict Salafist and other Islamist groups, which were repressed under the regime of ousted President Hosni Mubarak. The spiritual leader of Egypt's Coptic Christian minority, Pope Shenouda III, declared three days of mourning, prayer and fasting for the victims, starting Tuesday. He also presided over funerals on Monday for some of the slain Christians. Egypt's Health Ministry has confirmed that at least 26 people were killed and nearly 300 wounded in Sunday's violence. Egypt's military rulers have ordered a speedy investigation into the incident. Peaceful protest turns violent Around 2,000 Coptic Christians had gathered outside the state television building Sunday to protest an attack on a church a week earlier. Witnesses say at least two armored vehicles rammed into the crowd, killing several protestors. Troops then started shooting at the demonstrators. The situation spiraled quickly out of control, spreading to Tahrir Square and other parts of Cairo. EU foreign ministers meeting in Luxembourg Monday condemned the violence, with German Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle calling on all sides to exercise restraint. State television said protesters set fire to vehicles "It is about time that the Egyptian leadership understands the importance of religious plurality and tolerance," he said. Chancellor Angela Merkel's spokesman, Steffen Seibert, said Germany was very "worried" by the situation. "We can only call on the Egyptian government to get to the bottom of these incidents as soon as possible and bring those responsible to justice," Seibert told journalists. British Foreign Secretary William Hague urged the Egyptian authorities to reaffirm freedom of worship in Egypt.  "I am very concerned, very alarmed about the clashes in Cairo", said Hague.    'Dark, dark day'  Activists voiced frustration online in response to the violence, which they compared to Mubarak's crackdown against peaceful protests around the country in January.  "What happened [in Cairo] is exactly what happened on January 25," said Muslim activist Asmaa Mahfouz in reference to the start of the anti-Mubarak uprising.  "This is a dark, dark day in the military's history. This is betrayal, a conspiracy, murder. I saw bodies missing hands and legs, heads twisted away or plastered to the ground," Hossam Bahgat, a human rights activist, tweeted from a local hospital.  Pictures of smashed faces and dead bodies of people who, activists said, had been run over by military vehicles were circulated online. Sharaf said the violence contradicted the revolution 'Enemies of the revolution'  The clashes add to growing frustration among activists with the army, which Egyptians accuse of attempting to assert its power even as the country pushes on with its transition to democracy. The army has denied this.  Prime Minister Essam Sharaf, without accusing the army outright, was quick to condemn the violence.  "Instead of advancing to build a modern state of democratic principles we are back searching for security and stability, worrying that there are hidden hands, both domestic and foreign, seeking to obstruct the will of Egyptians in establishing a democracy," Sharaf said on state television. Sharaf didn't name those "hidden hands" explicitly but later said anyone seeking to benefit from the unrest was an "enemy of the January revolution." Concern about upcoming elections  The Egyptian cabinet vowed Monday that the violence would not derail the country's first democratic election since the toppling of Mubarak's autocratic regime in February. The election is scheduled for November 28.  Cabinet spokesman Mohamed Hegazy said authorities would prevent "any group" from "manipulating national unity in Egypt" or "delaying the process of democratic transformation."  "The most important thing is to contain the situation, see the way forward and [take] the necessary measures to avoid any ramifications," he said.  Author: Gabriel Borrud, Wilhelmina Lyffyt (AFP, dpa, Reuters) Editor: Martin Kuebler


Egyptian liberals abandon vote on constitutional panel The liberal minority in Egypt's parliament has walked out of a vote on a panel charged with drafting the nation's post-revolution constitution. The liberal parties accuse the Islamist groups of dominating the process. Liberal parliamentarians in Egypt on Saturday boycotted a vote to appoint a panel to draft a new constitution, accusing the majority Islamist parties of a power grab that would see the body dominated by their choice picks. "It's ridiculous," said Naguib Sawiris, founder of the Free Egyptians Party, the largest liberal bloc in the Islamist-dominated parliament. "A constitution being written by one force and one force alone. We tried our best, and there was no use." The Freedom and Justice Party (FJP), the political wing of the Muslim Brotherhood, had promised to appoint the 100-member constitutional panel through consensus. But the FJP and the more hard-line Salafists raised controversy when they passed a measure that called for half of the panel's members to come from the lower and upper houses of the legislature. The FJP and the Salafists make up three-quarters of parliament while the liberal Egyptian bloc occupies just 9 percent of the seats in the lower house. The FJP presented a list of its 50 parliamentary nominees for the panel, which included 36 Islamists and 14 lawmakers from other parties. "The constitution should not reflect the majority, it should reflect all forces in society," said Rifaat al-Said, the head of the left-wing Tagammu party, which boycotted the vote from the start. "There is an attempt to posses everything," he said of his party's Islamist opponents. "Possessing the constitution is the most dangerous thing." ElBaradei is excluded In addition to the 50 parliamentarians who will sit on the panel, the remaining 50 members are to be public figures chosen from outside of the legislature. But former UN nuclear watchdog chief Mohammed ElBaradei, one of Egypt's leading liberal democracy advocates, has been excluded from participating on the panel. FJP parliamentarian Mohammed el-Beltagi said on his Facebook page Friday that ElBaradei would have been included "only if he didn't oppose the current road map" for drafting the constitution. The 100-member constitutional panel will be charged with the critical task of deciding the strength of the executive branch, the role of the military and the importance of Shariah law. Many liberal groups are concerned that the Muslim Brotherhood and the hard-line Salafists could cut a deal with the ruling military council, allowing the armed forces to maintain much of their power if they don't oppose the passage of stricter Islamic rules. "A parliament whose legitimacy is in doubt will elect a panel, half of it from parliament, that is not partial to forming a constitution for Egypt rather than for the (parliamentary) majority," ElBaradei posted on his Twitter account. slk/tm (AP, AFP)


Egypt's interim president sworn in following Morsi's ousting The head of Egypt’s Supreme Constitutional Court has been sworn in as the interim president after the army ousted President Mohammed Morsi. A senior member of Morsi's Muslim Brotherhood has been arrrested. Adly Mansour, the head of the country's Supreme Constitutional Court, has been sworn in Thursday as Egypt's temporary head of state after the military ousted President Mohammed Morsi. In his first remarks, Mansour praised the massive street demonstrations, that began on June 30, that led to Morsi's ouster. He also hailed the youth behind the protests saying they embodied "the nation's conscience, its ambitions and hopes." "The most glorious thing about June 30 is that it brought together everyone without discrimination or division," he said. "I offer my greetings to the revolutionary people of Egypt." Meanwhile, Egyptian military police on Wednesday arrested the supreme leader of the Muslim Brotherhood, Mohammed Badie, for inciting the killing of protesters. Warrants for the arrests of a number of other senior members of the Brotherhood have also been issued. After a 48-hour deadline for Morsi to reach a compromise deal with the opposition was met with no action by the president, the Egyptian army began its intervention solution Wednesday night. Permalink http://p.dw.com/p/191uI Al-Sissi also announced the formation of a panel that would look into amendments to the constitution and a law would be drafted to regulate parliamentary elections. The current constitution - drafted in a committee dominated by Morsi's Islamist allies - had been suspended, he said. Following the news, Cairo's Tahrir Square, the centerpoint of the public protests opposing Morsi, erupted in celebration with people letting off fireworks, singing and cheering in the streets. Muslim Brotherhood spokesman Gehad El-Haddad wrote on his Twitter feed that Morsi was placed under house arrest at the headquarters of the Republican Guard along with several other Brotherhood members. He later said Morsi had been separated and taken to the defense ministry. A revolution reignited A statement on the Egyptian president's office's Twitter account quoted Morsi as saying that the actions of the military amounted to "a full coup." Morsi narrowly won a presidential runoff election last June, claiming 51.7 percent of the vote and becoming Egypt's first democratically elected president. However, Egypt's largely state-run press unanimously dubbed the army's overthrow as a “legitimate” revolution. "The people's legitimacy was victorious," the government-owned Al-Gomhuriya said on its front page. The headline in government-owned newspaper, Al-Ahram, read, "President ousted by revolutionary legitimacy." State-owned Al-Akhbar said, "And the people's revolution was victorious.” Violence was reported in several cities across Egypt overnight. State-run newspaper Al-Ahram reported eight deaths and 343 injuries. The Brotherhood's El-Haddad also said on Twitter that men in plain clothes had opened fire on a group of Morsi supporters protesting against the military intervention. hc/rg (Reuters, AFP, AP, dpa)


Social media use evolving in Egypt Social media played an undeniably important role during the Arab Spring revolutions in 2011. But it's now become part of the standard repertoire of political upheaval - also for the establishment. There's no doubt that the citizenry relied greatly on social media to network and organize during the Arab Spring, when areas in the Middle East and North Africa erupted in popular revolt during the early part of 2011. Platforms like Facebook and Twitter were used to call and coordinate protests, and also for sharing information on issues around the pro-democracy movement. Two and a half years later, unrest in the Arab world continues - and social media has become a mainstay in them. Activists continue to use it, but they aren't the only ones - powerful government personages and agencies are also tweeting up a storm. Meanwhile, technological extensions such as automatic translation tools are breaking down the language barrier and extending the potential reach of social media for social movements in general. Solidarity and acceleration Facebook in particular played an important role in the Arab Spring, with people organizing protests for example over the Facebook page of Egyptian activist Wael Ghonim. Protesters used Twitter to organize protest logistics, providing live updates from the ground and calling for support or backup. Some commentators - for example, Chris Taylor of the popular tech site Mashable - went so far as to call Egypt's Arab Spring uprising a "Facebook revolution." Over time, as the role of social media in the Arab Spring continues to be a topic of study and debate, scholarship emerging on the issue has helped clarify what may have been some degree of mythologizing hype. Social media continues to play a significant role in the events presently unfolding in Egypt Eira Martens, a research associate with the DW Academy, carried out an empirical study on the role of social media during Egypt's Arab Spring in 2011. She said calling it a "Facebook revolution" would be an exaggeration. Her research showed that in addition to helping organize protests, social media - in particular shared photos and videos - allowed participants to form a collective identity. This increased a sense of solidarity and helped lower a "fear threshold" that may otherwise have prevented people from taking to the streets. Another of Marten's findings was that social media helped to compress the time frame of the uprising. "In the Egyptian context, Facebook in particular helped accelerate the protests," Martens said of her research results. "The majority of the social media activists I interviewed believe that it would have taken a few more years to overthrow Mubarak's government," she added. Standard tool But by now, those in power have also caught on to the importance of social media in times of social upheaval. In the current unrest in Egypt, prominent politicians have been micro-blogging along with the rest. Mohamed ElBaradei, a leader of Egypt's opposition movement, has more than 1.6 million followers on Twitter. He tweeted on June 28: Powerful politicians, in this case the aspiring future leader of Egypt, are in this way able to preen their public image and communicate directly with their base. ElBaradei's message of peace was retweeted by Wael Ghonim, who continues to be active on the protest front. The embattled regime also used social media - Mohammed Morsi live-micro-blogged over the course of his downfall. And Twitter, in an apparent move to help people around the world to better connect with each other, has rolled out a beta translation tool that shows what the tweet means in numerous target languages. Hovering over a foreign-language tweet in Twitter, the text "View translation" appears in the upper-right corner. Clicking on this provides a translation of the tweet text by Bing (a Microsoft search tool) which appears inline directly below the original text within the Twitter message box. Morsi's final tweet, from July 2, was thus instantaneously accessible not only to those speaking Arabic, but to the world at large: The Twitter feature, however, is still in beta and only available for some prominent Egyptian politicians and activists. The tweets of Adli Mansour, for example - the president of the constitutional court who has been appointed as Egypt's interim president - are not yet available for translation. Enhancing public debate The actual effects of such attempts to consolidate waning power are unclear; however, what is clear is that those within the establishment as well have jumped on the social media bandwagon. And this could have positive results. Martens believes that over the last two years, "social media users of all kinds - be it individual Egyptians, political parties, governmental actors, NGOs - have learned to use the tools more efficiently for whatever their aims are." But people, and not social media, remain the drivers of social change, Martens emphasized. And as such public debate is broadened, it "can potentially lead to positive political and social change in the real world."


Facebook users discuss Egypt DW users have been discussing the events unfolding in Egypt over the past several days - here are a few excerpts. DW Arabia saw a wave of comments in the wake of the astounding events in Egypt - around 300 overnight and in the early morning after the ousting of President Mohammed Morsi. Most supported Morsi's overthrow and congratulated the Egyptian people. Clair Farouk wrote: "It is true that he is an elected president but he ruined Egypt for years to come due to his false decrees. If we wait for another three years, God knows what more he’ll do to the country. It was indeed a coup, but a popular one and not a military one. Those who do not see the masses in the streets are blind." Abu Abdullah replied: "Why did President Morsi become unwanted? We need to understand the facts around this 'Morsi' … he is the first elected president for Egypt, the first civilian president, the first president with a beard [religious], the first president whose motorcade doesn’t hinder normal traffic, the first president to ban Sufi rituals, the first president to allow a female news anchor wearing a scarf in 52 years, the first Arab president to win with an election result lower than 99 percent, the first Arab president to turn on the military, the first Arab president to memorize the entire Quran, the first Arab president from the Muslim Brothers … the first Arab president to allow criticism, the first Arab president not to punish the officer who arrested him [before becoming President] …" Yaser Mohamed argued: "Does Morsi not notice that there are more than 25 million citizens in the streets, more than those who elected him? Does he not understand that this removes his legitimacy? Is this not the [Tahrir] square where he swore his legal oath? Is it not the square that made him president? He should admit that it is this square that overturned him because he was not up to the task, nor [Mohammed] Badie [leader of the Muslim Brotherhood]." Abdullah Hassaan countered: "This is a coup on democracy!!!! Mohammed Morsi came through fierce competitive elections and not through force. It is true that the [Muslim] Brothers did terrible things to the country, but that doesn’t mean overthrowing the legitimate president. If this goes on, no president in any of the Arab Spring countries would last more than a year, and this is not acceptable." Discussion was similarly heated on the DW English Facebook page with many general statements in support of the Egyptian people. Users responded to the question of what the regime change means for democracy. Allie Dawe pointed out: "It means little for women now that the rape squads have begun operating their nasty form of terrorism AGAIN." Scott Curts wrote: "I truly wish the best for ALL of Egypt ... all citizens INCLUDED. A great people with a great history. Today in the US we celebrate our independence. 'Our founding fathers knew how dangerous theocracies could be. They gave us a constitutional democracy in large part to protect minorities from the yearnings of a religious majority. This Independence Day, their design of a secular state, with no religious belief receiving preference over any other, should be celebrated common ground for all Americans, whether conservative or liberal, religious or secular.' I believe as did they that officially mixing together politics and religion are a dangerous thing." Hamza Sarfaraz opined: "Revolution? It was a coup by the same army which had hijacked the country for 30 years and against which people rebelled. Democratically elected government has been removed how can it be a revolution? I think Egyptians got used to the cruelty of Hosni Mubarak so they couldn't digest democracy so they called for another Hosni Mubarak." Amit Roy reflected: "Hahahaha GAME OVER what a pleasure to see game over for Morsi and his Muslim brotherhood, it seems Arab Spring is reaching its pinnacle but question creeps in as Morsi is democratically elected in a fair election, though I don't like him and his fundamentalist brotherhood that can not be a reason for his departure like this, it may set very bad precedent for democracy in future and my joy of as morsi' is out could be short lived, but still I will support secular forces, I am blind and stand up for the forces of freedom."


German Press Review: "This revolution is not over, it has just begun." Following Hosni Mubarak's resignation, German editorial writers wonder whether the Egyptian military government will really relinquish its power. The country's future, they say, is wide open. Egypt's main problem, according to the business daily 
Handelsblatt, is that the democracy movement on Tahrir Square doesn't have any outstanding political leaders. "For 18 days, that was its strength," the paper wrote. "During the uprising, no one was able to use the movement for his own political goals. But for a civilized transition, Egypt's democracy movement will have to come up with true leaders." 

Die Welt commented that people who are able, in just 18 days, to bring down a leader considered to be firmly in power, have every reason to believe that much more is possible. "The future is wide open, waiting to be shaped." A feeling of empowerment makes the moment so emotionally intense, the paper said, adding that this is "the revolution's strength and its weakness." With no one at the helm, die Welt concluded, people were bound to take action where they believe they can make a difference. 
Egyptians no longer want to see people in uniform head their country, Munich's 
Süddeutsche Zeitung wrote. They still trusted the rebels at this point, the paper said, but warned that should this trust be betrayed, the country's citizens would take to the streets again: "This revolution is not over, it has just begun." 
The

Mittelbayerische Zeitung was sceptical to what extent the military is willing to pave the way to democracy rather than entrenching the status quo, since a rapid transition to democracy would endanger its own priviliges. "At the moment, the opposition has won nothing more than hope for better times," the paper wrote and added that Egyptians must not only watch the military leaders' every step, they must demand a significant role in shaping the transition process. 
The

Rheinische Post shared that wariness, pointing out that after all, the new playmakers are nothing but turncoats who not too long ago pledged eternal loyalty to their president. "It wouldn't be the first time that such troops suddenly discovered the pleasures of ruling with military communiqués and dictatorial decrees." 
Egypt has experienced itself in a totally different light during the 18-day-long popular uprising, commented the 
Stuttgarter Zeitung. Suddenly, the paper wrote, people who normally can't form orderly lines to board a tram stood patiently in line at the check points at Tahrir square. "For the first time, Egyptians regard themselves as active citizens of their own country rather than a mass of subjects." 
Compiled by Dagmar Breitenbach
Editor: Chuck Penfold Die Welt commented that people who are able, in just 18 days, to bring down a leader considered to be firmly in power, have every reason to believe that much more is possible. "The future is wide open, waiting to be shaped." A feeling of empowerment makes the moment so emotionally intense, the paper said, adding that this is "the revolution's strength and its weakness." With no one at the helm, die Welt concluded, people were bound to take action where they believe they can make a difference. 
Egyptians no longer want to see people in uniform head their country, Munich's 
Süddeutsche Zeitung wrote. They still trusted the rebels at this point, the paper said, but warned that should this trust be betrayed, the country's citizens would take to the streets again: "This revolution is not over, it has just begun." 
The

Mittelbayerische Zeitung was sceptical to what extent the military is willing to pave the way to democracy rather than entrenching the status quo, since a rapid transition to democracy would endanger its own priviliges. "At the moment, the opposition has won nothing more than hope for better times," the paper wrote and added that Egyptians must not only watch the military leaders' every step, they must demand a significant role in shaping the transition process. 
The

Rheinische Post shared that wariness, pointing out that after all, the new playmakers are nothing but turncoats who not too long ago pledged eternal loyalty to their president. "It wouldn't be the first time that such troops suddenly discovered the pleasures of ruling with military communiqués and dictatorial decrees." 
Egypt has experienced itself in a totally different light during the 18-day-long popular uprising, commented the 
Stuttgarter Zeitung. Suddenly, the paper wrote, people who normally can't form orderly lines to board a tram stood patiently in line at the check points at Tahrir square. "For the first time, Egyptians regard themselves as active citizens of their own country rather than a mass of subjects." 
Compiled by Dagmar Breitenbach
Editor: Chuck Penfold Egyptians no longer want to see people in uniform head their country, Munich's 
Süddeutsche Zeitung wrote. They still trusted the rebels at this point, the paper said, but warned that should this trust be betrayed, the country's citizens would take to the streets again: "This revolution is not over, it has just begun." 
The

Mittelbayerische Zeitung was sceptical to what extent the military is willing to pave the way to democracy rather than entrenching the status quo, since a rapid transition to democracy would endanger its own priviliges. "At the moment, the opposition has won nothing more than hope for better times," the paper wrote and added that Egyptians must not only watch the military leaders' every step, they must demand a significant role in shaping the transition process. 
The

Rheinische Post shared that wariness, pointing out that after all, the new playmakers are nothing but turncoats who not too long ago pledged eternal loyalty to their president. "It wouldn't be the first time that such troops suddenly discovered the pleasures of ruling with military communiqués and dictatorial decrees." 
Egypt has experienced itself in a totally different light during the 18-day-long popular uprising, commented the 
Stuttgarter Zeitung. Suddenly, the paper wrote, people who normally can't form orderly lines to board a tram stood patiently in line at the check points at Tahrir square. "For the first time, Egyptians regard themselves as active citizens of their own country rather than a mass of subjects." 
Compiled by Dagmar Breitenbach
Editor: Chuck Penfold The

Mittelbayerische Zeitung was sceptical to what extent the military is willing to pave the way to democracy rather than entrenching the status quo, since a rapid transition to democracy would endanger its own priviliges. "At the moment, the opposition has won nothing more than hope for better times," the paper wrote and added that Egyptians must not only watch the military leaders' every step, they must demand a significant role in shaping the transition process. 
The

Rheinische Post shared that wariness, pointing out that after all, the new playmakers are nothing but turncoats who not too long ago pledged eternal loyalty to their president. "It wouldn't be the first time that such troops suddenly discovered the pleasures of ruling with military communiqués and dictatorial decrees." 
Egypt has experienced itself in a totally different light during the 18-day-long popular uprising, commented the 
Stuttgarter Zeitung. Suddenly, the paper wrote, people who normally can't form orderly lines to board a tram stood patiently in line at the check points at Tahrir square. "For the first time, Egyptians regard themselves as active citizens of their own country rather than a mass of subjects." 
Compiled by Dagmar Breitenbach
Editor: Chuck Penfold The

Rheinische Post shared that wariness, pointing out that after all, the new playmakers are nothing but turncoats who not too long ago pledged eternal loyalty to their president. "It wouldn't be the first time that such troops suddenly discovered the pleasures of ruling with military communiqués and dictatorial decrees." 
Egypt has experienced itself in a totally different light during the 18-day-long popular uprising, commented the 
Stuttgarter Zeitung. Suddenly, the paper wrote, people who normally can't form orderly lines to board a tram stood patiently in line at the check points at Tahrir square. "For the first time, Egyptians regard themselves as active citizens of their own country rather than a mass of subjects." 
Compiled by Dagmar Breitenbach
Editor: Chuck Penfold Egypt has experienced itself in a totally different light during the 18-day-long popular uprising, commented the 
Stuttgarter Zeitung. Suddenly, the paper wrote, people who normally can't form orderly lines to board a tram stood patiently in line at the check points at Tahrir square. "For the first time, Egyptians regard themselves as active citizens of their own country rather than a mass of subjects." 
Compiled by Dagmar Breitenbach
Editor: Chuck Penfold Compiled by Dagmar Breitenbach
Editor: Chuck Penfold


Egypt's Copts vent their fury at army and media Young Copts who took part in the demonstrations on Sunday blame the media for manipulating information and inciting hatred. In addition, they warn the Egyptian army has gained too much power since the revolution. A day after the tragic clashes between the Christian Coptics and the army, which cost the lives of 26 people, the Egyptians woke up to a new, tense morning. The scenes of Sunday may play a crucial role in shaping the form of a future Egypt. "There were clashes between the Copts and the army, and other civilians helped the army. A lot of tear gas was in the air, and I still can't breathe properly. Both sides threw stones. I have witnessed the army's violence, I saw them firing their guns, but I couldn't say if they were shooting at protesters or just in the air," said Rami Yaacoub, a 29-year-old Copt. Sarah Assem, 25, was also there. She had a worse encounter with the armed forces. "I was outside the TV station, when the demonstration was about to take place, at 5pm. Another group of demonstrators was making its way from Shubra, a Coptic neighborhood in Cairo. We saw on Twitter they were being attacked, and then suddenly stones were thrown at us and gunshots were heard," Assem said. "Everyone started running, it was a total chaos. The soldiers beat up people with clubs. One of the hit me on the back strongly, and I fell down. When I got up I escaped from the scene." Earlier this year, the revolution had passed on quite peacefully. It brought hope for a change, for more civil rights. Now, following Sunday's events, this hope may have taken a blow. "I am very disappointed. Last night when I came back home, I saw the videos of people run over by armoured vehicles, it was difficult to watch. What disappoints me most is the lack of the response from the authorities. It is not known if they will establish a committee to investigate those events," said Yaacoub. "The only response was the unconvincing speech of the prime minister, Essam Sharaf. He talked about actions that damaged the revolution, but where is the accountability? The entire revolution broke because a lack of accountability, and now it is happening again. The government looks aside, and that leads to all problems. It makes the minorities bitter." Military and Media to blame Assem blamed not only the government, but the media. "It is not the first violent clash between the army and the citizens. I don't expect anything from the army, so I can't say I am disappointed. However, it is a disgrace that Egyptian media is telling lies. They announced the protesters are attacking the army, and asked civilians to go out and defend the armed forces. Who on earth ask for such a thing?," she said angrily. "The media holds the main responsibility for what happened. Many people I met on my way home from the demonstration really believed the army was attacked. The state-owned media is very popular in Egypt, and most people believe what they see on TV." Many feel the army is controlling the media  In her opinion, there is a certain conspiracy involving the state owned media and the Egyptian army. "I assume the army controls the media. Of course I can't put my finger on it and point if it is merely corruption, blackmail or threats. In any case, one thing is not in doubt - the media totally support the army and its position in the Egyptian society." Yaacoub is less radical. He didn't mention conspiracy theories, but also acknowledged the power of the media. "There is a very high rate of illiteracy in Egypt. Due to that, many people get information from the TV. The problem with the Egyptian media is that they are trying to make a picture of one, homogeneous Egypt. That causes ignorance and lack of tolerance. We are not homogeneous, there are many minorities here." The fear now is that Egypt is moving toward a military-led regime. Getting rid of all the old habits, it appears, will not be as easy as it seemed in February. "There are several movements demanding accountability from the media. One of the revolution's demands was to clean the newspapers and TV stations from the old corrupted journalists. It hasn't happened yet. The average Egyptian admires the army, and I respect that, but I just don't think an army can control the state," said Assem. "Ever since the revolution there is no more fear of speaking freely. Two years ago, I would have never talked with you," admitted Yaacoub. "We can't know yet where this revolution is going, whether we get more civil rights or more economic liberty. Right now, the economy is still bad and we are still under military regime. You can't eat freedom, so a better economy is essential, but without freedom and civil rights the prosperity wouldn't reach all the people, instead you will get corruption and unfair prices." Author: Adi Halfon Editor: Rob Mudge


Egypt's protesters ready for the next revolution On the face of it, not much has changed since the protests against former President Hosni Mubarak's regime began a year ago. Now, activists want to start another revolution to topple the military council. These days, not even freshly brewed peppermint tea can help anymore: Omar Sabry's voice simply hasn't recovered. He's hoarse from three weeks of leading the chants while roaming the streets of Heliopolis, a neighborhood in northeastern Cairo, together with other activists. Sabry shouts out his anger at the violence, and at the military council's lies. Omar Sabry is in his mid-20s and works as a consultant. But his heart belongs to the revolution. He and his fellow activists want people to wake up. They show videos depicting the brutal treatment of protesters in public at the hands of the police and military. They gather to form human chains and to spray graffitis. They want to achieve great things by getting the masses back onto the streets. On January 25, one year to the day that the rebellion against Hosni Mubarak's regime began, they plan to start another rebellion. "We have to bring our revolution to an end," says Omar. Remnants of Mubarak's regime Not much has changed since the revolution in Egypt started one year ago. Mubarak was ousted, but his old guard remains firmly in control, supported by the military council. Court cases against the former President Mubarak and his stalwarts have been delayed. So far, none of the police officers who shot protesters to death a year ago has been prosecuted.  Protesters march through the city to win over the public Instead, the security apparatus continues to crackdown on protesters on the streets. Accordung to the protesters, at least 120 people have been killed and more than 6,000 wounded since July last year. NGOs critical of what has been happening have been closed down in order to prevent a public outcry about human rights violations. Activists and bloggers, too, are being silenced. Some are beaten up on the streets by the regime's henchmen. Others are made short work of in trials before military tribunals. According to Human Rights Watch, over 12,000 civilians have been brought before military tribunals within this past year - many more than during Mubarak's 30-year reign. Toppling the military council The military council has turned a deaf ear to the cries for food, freedom and social equality - cries which have been resonating throughout Egypt for the past year. Now, the activists want to topple the council. They want presidential elections to be held in April instead of June, and they want all powers to be immediately transferred to the Parliament's president. They also want to prevent the military council from having any part in drafting the new constitution. Over 50 political parties and movements have called for mass protests on January 25 - not just in Cairo, but all over the country. In order for these protests to be successful, Omar and the other activists have to win over the population. But many Egyptians are tired of revolutions - they simply want food, security and stability, and less chaos instead of even more. And so, Omar canvasses neigborhood by neighborhood, explaining the activists' cause using leaflets, photos, and videos. Military Council's threats The police does not like these videos. A kiosk supplying the activists with electricity for their video screening was shut down that same evening. During the marches leading protesters to central public places, glass bottles were thrown at the activists. One man got out of his car, shoving one of Omar's friends to the ground. The man argued the march was just blocking traffic and had been incited and paid for by foreigners. Omar says it's people like this man who the activists need to win over. "This is really getting serious," he adds. The situation in Cairo is tense.  Omar Sabry shouts out his anger at the military council  Activists are also up against the military council's propaganda machine, and against that of the state media. The military council intends to celebrates the revolution's first anniversary on January 25 without any troublemakers - Field Marshal Mohamed Tantawi already spoke of the great dangers which Egypt was facing and of people aiming to set the country afire. "They plan to break Egypt's backbone, the military," Tantawi said, adding: "We will not tolerate this." It is hardly a veiled threat against Omar and other protesters, meant to invoke fear and to keep protesters at bay. Muslim brotherhood According to the Egyptian daily Al Masry Al Youm, special security forces have been trained to take on protesters. They are supposed to have been given the go-ahead to use live ammunition. If true, conflicts between protesters and security forces are likely to escalate. The Muslim Brotherhood, for its part, wants to celebrate the anniversary away from any demonstrations. A year ago, many of them were still being persecuted or stuck in Mubarak's torture chambers. Today, they constitute the majority of Egyptian Parliament. "We are at a decisive point in time," says Omar. He adds that on January 25, it will become clear whether protesters on the streets are powerful enough to exact some political decisions. He is prepared to give up everything for a democratic Egypt. "If they assault us," he says, "we'll take on the bullets with open arms." Author: Viktoria Kleber/ ar Editor: Rob Mudge


Islamists secure Egyptian upper house majority Islamists secured a majority of seats in polls for the Egyptian upper house of parliament, the electoral commission said Saturday, capping the landmark rise of Islamist parties in the post-revolution period. The Muslim Brotherhood, banned under former President Hosni Mubarak, won 58 percent of the seats up for grabs, solidifying their place as the country's most powerful and organized political group. The ultra-conservative Al-Nour party finished second with around a quarter of the seats, while the more liberal parties, among them the Egyptian Bloc and Wafd, finished third with a total of 12 percent of seats. Two thirds of the 270 seats in the upper house, or Shura Council, are filled by elections, while the rest are appointed. Islamist parties also dominated the lower house elections earlier this year, in which the Muslim Brotherhood won nearly half of the seats on offer. Members of both houses of parliament will now choose a panel to draft a new constitution. Meanwhile, talks are underway in Cairo to resolve the detention and impending trial of dozens of NGO workers, including Americans and Germans. US officials have hinted that the trial, which was due to begin Sunday, could endanger aid to Egypt. Officials said it was hoped the issue could be resolved "within days." Egypt is still struggling to establish a democratic government after Mubarak was ousted in February last year following an 18-day uprising. dfm/bk (AFP, AP)


Protests in Egypt continue despite government shut down of Internet Early on Friday, the Egyptian government took steps to shut down Internet connectivity, with reports of telephone networks also being denied. Despite these measures, reports of protests continued in Cairo. On Friday, Egyptians woke up to discover that they no longer had access to the Internet, thanks to the government which had apparently ordered internet service providers (ISPs) to cease international connections. Though one ISP was left operating on Friday, James Cowie of the US-based Internet analysis firm Renesys reported on its blog that "virtually all of Egypt's Internet addresses are now unreachable, worldwide." However, by Tuesday morning, February 1, the remaining ISP, Noor, went offline as well. While there have been Internet slowdowns, and the temporary removal of a China province from the Internet, only on a few occasions has a country been temporarily taken completely offline - Nepal in 2005 and Burma in 2007. "What happens when you disconnect a modern economy and 80 million people from the Internet?" Cowie wrote. "What will happen tomorrow, on the streets and in the credit markets?" During the 2009 protests in Iran, access to the Internet was throttled, and some cell towers were disabled, but the entire country never vanished from cyberspace as Egypt virtually did on Friday. No dialtone Additionally, the government has ordered mobile phone providers to cease operation, as Vodaphone Egypt reported in a statement on its website. "All mobile operators in Egypt have been instructed to suspend services in selected areas," the company said in the statement. "Under Egyptian legislation the authorities have the right to issue such an order and we are obliged to comply with it. The Egyptian authorities will be clarifying the situation in due course."  Mobile phone networks have also been suspended by government order The ramifications outside of Egypt are troubling as activists and journalists struggled to understand the situation there, as Ammar Abdulhamid, a Syrian dissident and human rights activist in the United States, told Deutsche Welle. "The Internet, and the Tunisian precedent made the world take notice of events in Egypt from day one, whereas it took months for them to notice the importance of developments in Tunisia, but even there, the Internet played a crucial factor," he said. "The fact that Egyptian authorities are doing their best to cut off communications and access to the Internet demonstrates its importance from their perspective." 'Reverting back to Protest 1.0' But on the streets of Cairo, the lack of communication presents more immediate problems according to Abdulhamid. "The value of the Internet and mobile technology was and is to facilitate direct real-time communications between activists themselves in the first place," Abdulhamid told Deutsche Welle. "Communicating with outside supporters comes second." However, beyond coordinating protests, other experts said the inability of protesters to quickly communicate via SMS could lead to more injuries. "One thing people use SMS for is to tell other people when they see police and to get out of harm's way, and so more people will end up being injured," said Robert Guerra, director of the Internet Freedom Project at Freedom House, an American advocacy organization. "We're reverting back to Protest 1.0," he told Deutsche Welle. "These are people who are accustomed to tech, we'll have to see how they react."  Despite the lack of technology, protests continued in Cairo on Friday  The fight continues According to the Twitter feed of Diaa Hadid, a reporter with the Associated Press in Cairo, the protests have continued unabated. "Can see teargas plumes and police charging from AP office. Protesters fighting back," she wrote early Friday afternoon. Apparently, the protesters harnessed other social, non-technological methods of organization, according to Guerra, by gathering at mosques to issue a call to organize. Especially since the June 2009 protests in Iran, many in the foreign policy and online intelligensia world have continually debated what role the Internet plays in prompting democratic change around the globe. Evgeny Morozov, a Belarus-born journalist, argues in a new book published earlier this month, "The Net Delusion: The Dark Side of Internet Freedom," that there isn't such a clear causal line between online tools and democratic change. "There's an assumption that the moment that we give information and facts to Russians, Chinese, Iranians and Vietnamese about how bad their governments are, that these people will immediately start going out on the street and protesting," he told Deutsche Welle in an interview earlier this month. "There's this assumption that information is power. Much of this is a myth simply because most people already know how bad their governments are." Still, some disagree with Morozov, most notably Clay Shirky, an American author who has written extensively on the Internet and recently published a piece in Foreign Affairs, extolling the virtues of social media and technology in organizing revolutions. On Friday morning, he wrote the following bittersweet message of vindication on Twitter: "[The] best reason to believe digital media improves public coordination is that the autocrats believe that." Author: Stuart Tiffen Editor: Cyrus Farivar


New Hope on the Nile - Egypt after Mubarak The winds of change are blowing in Egypt. The people have drummed out the dictator and now cherish hopes of freedom and democracy. They're debating with an openness rarely known in the Arab world before. A young Egyptian woman living in Berlin who took part in a pro-opposition Facebook group right from the start sets out for Cairo to get a firsthand look at the situation there. And what she sees is anything but stable. The former regime is still strong, and the danger of a counter-revolution still looms large.


Egyptian satirist released on bail after questioning A popular Egyptian satirist has been released on bail after questioning over alleged defamation of Islam and the country’s president. The move has raised fears over freedom of speech under Egypt’s Islamist government. Egyptian television satirist Bassem Youssef was released on bail Sunday after nearly five hours of questioning regarding allegations that he had insulted President Mohammed Morsi and Islam. Youssef, who presented himself for questioning one day after the warrant was issued, was ordered to pay 15,000 Egyptian pounds (around $2,200 or 1,715 euros) pending investigation into the complaints. Several dozen supporters joined him outside the public prosecutor's office. Youssef confirmed the bail conditions on Twitter, saying they amounted to three lawsuits. No date has yet been set for questioning into a fourth legal complaint. Prominent Morsi critic The prominent television personality first rose to fame after the uprising that swept Hosni Mubarak from power in 2011, with a satirical online show. His show "ElBernameg" or "The Program," is now broadcast weekly on the private CBC Egyptian television station. He is the most prominent critic of President Morsi to be called in for questioning in recent weeks, raising concerns about freedom of expression in post-Mubarak Egypt. Egyptian liberal politician and opposition leader Mohammed ElBaradei said via Twitter that the questioning was the kind of action only seen in "fascist regimes." "It is the continuation of the failed and ugly moves to thwart the revolution," he said. Arrest warrants for activists Youssef's questioning came after the prosecutor general issued five arrest warrants for prominent political activists accused of inciting violence against the Muslim Brotherhood, the group that propelled Morsi to power last year. Youssef frequently imitates Morsi's speeches and gestures. In one episode earlier this year, Youssef exposed video clips of Morsi in 2010 where he called Zionists "pigs." The remarks sparked a brief diplomatic row with the US administration, and Morsi issued a statement to defuse the situation. hc/slk (Reuters, AFP, dpa)


The failings of Egypt's Arab Spring revolution One and a half years after ousting president Hosni Mubarak, the participants of Egypt's uprisings seem to have lost their voice. Many are disappointed with the political situation ahead of the presidential elections. Amazed expressions, glowing faces, radiant smiles - these are the moments captured on Cairo's Tahrir Square in January 2011. In the video accompanying the protest song "Sout Al Horeya" ("Voice of Freedom") by Hany Adel and Amir Eid, the pictures tell the story of Egyptians fighting for their freedom. It has been viewed millions of times on YouTube. But this euphoric atmosphere is long gone. One and a half years after the fall of Hosni Mubarak's regime, there are not many traces of the revolution left. It appears as though the protesters of the first round of demonstrations have lost their voice, and the idea of freedom has become fiction. With slogans such as "The people demand the fall of the regime," hundreds of thousands of Egyptians took to the streets at the beginning of last year. Who they were and where they came from seemed to have no significance: together, they forced the long-standing Egyptian leader out of office, demanding democracy and the right to participate in political decisions. And as the Egyptian military assumed power over the country, it seemed like a new era had begun. After taking the reigns, the Supreme Council of the Armed Forces was supposed to hand over power to a civilian government within a few months. But this still has not happened. At the same time, for many Egyptians it looks as if the military council wants to retain its authority more than ever. A return of the old powers? The dissolution of the parliament elected a few months ago and the decision to allow Ahmed Shafiq, Mubarak's last prime minister, to participate in the run-off presidential election has been interpreted by some observers as a type of coup by the old powers, which are represented in the military council, as well as in the highest court and administration. But many Egyptians dream of peace and order, and are dogged by the country's stagnating economy and increasing crime rate. This is why some can imagine Shafiq as the future leader. Shafiq and Morsi: not the dream candidates for many Egyptians "There are many people in rural areas who don't have much of a clue about the protests and revolts of last year," said Oliver Schlumberger, Professor of Middle Eastern Politics at the University of Tübingen. "To them, Ahmed Shafiq may represent increased stability." 'A choice between the plague and cholera' Yet many see Shafiq as representing the old regime - and hope that Mohammed Morsi becomes the new president. The moderate Islamist has a rather uncharismatic image, but is still a lesser evil for some than the former prime minister. As leader of the Freedom and Justice Party, Morsi led the Muslim Brotherhood into the parliamentary elections. With 45 percent the vote, it became Egypt's strongest political force. During this election, its members are hoping for a similar result. Many of the first-wave activists do not see the two candidates as acceptable choices. In the last few days, they've been calling for a boycott of the elections, declaring them a "choice between the plague and cholera." A great number of them are disappointed with the outcome of the revolution, as their demands for co-determination, a civil government and an independent justice system have not been met. Asiem El Difraoui, a Middle East expert at the German Institute for International and Security Affairs, said that "the liberal forces that wanted to turn Egypt into a secular democracy seem to be very weak right now." "Especially women, who greatly assisted the revolutionaries, have not gained a lot of emancipation through the uprising," El Difraoui added. The liberals' resentment over the failings of the uprising seems to be growing. There is talk of large-scale demonstrations in case the elections are not fairly executed. Fragmented opposition The original protesters have called for a boycott of the elections However, it is hard to estimate the exact number of disillusioned revolutionaries, as the once united opposition is now fractured, and the dividing lines in the Egyptian society are blurred and in flux. "The Muslim Brotherhood, for example, is what we in Germany would call a large people's party: it unites very different political movements under one name," said Schlumberger. While the Brotherhood, together with the military council, has till now been seen as the winner of the revolution, its influence sank with the Egyptian Supreme Constitutional Court's Thursday decision to dissolve the Islamist-dominated parliament. Secularists in Egyptian society are concerned that the party would have Egypt become an Islamic state. The revolution's achievements Despite all the uncertainty and disappointment, one thing seems clear: Egyptians will not be worse off in the future than under Mubarak. "Even if a military dictatorship comes into existence, Egyptians from all sections of the political spectrum are convinced that the clock can't be turned back," explained El Difraoui. "There will never again be a dictatorship like the Mubarak regime." However, should the military authority remain in power, the participants of the initial uprisings would likely again raise their voices. They may be disappointed, but they are not afraid, as many of the changes brought about by the revolution are here to stay. Author: Anne Allmeling / ew Editor: Sonya Diehn


Funeral held for slain Egyptian soldiers A funeral has taken place for 16 members of Egypt's security forces killed on Sunday, in an attack on the Sinai Peninsula. A notable absentee was the country's president Mohammad Morsi. Aired on live television, the funeral began at an army mosque in Nasr City, in eastern Cairo, with the bodies of the slain soldiers draped in the national flag. State media reported that Morsi would attend the funeral, which was led by Field Marshal Hussein Tantawi, Egypt's defence minister and head of the Supreme Council of the Armed Forces. Other senior government officials and generals joined Tantawi in a brief procession that followed the caskets, after prayers. The state-run newspaper Al Ahram reported online that a presidential spokesman was to brief the press on Morsi's decision not to attend. The president announced three days of official mourning following the attack, which took place around sunset on Sunday near the Egyptian border town of Rafah. Troops were having their traditional meal after their daily fast during Ramadan, the Islamic holy month. "Every Egyptian feels this attack was directed against them. They all want vengeance, and there must be blood for blood," a presenter said during the broadcast. Following the attack, Egypt shut its Rafah border crossing with the Gaza Strip, which is the territory's only access to the outside world. Morsi later declared that his country's troops would retake control of the Sinai Peninsula. The Israeli army says that a crossing in Kerem Shalom, at the border of Israel, Egypt and Gaza, was reopened on Tuesday morning. Attack blame The attack has been blamed on Islamist extremists by state television in Egypt and Israeli authorities. However the Islamist group Hamas, which controls the Gaza strip, has denied that Palestinian militants were responsible. The country's Muslim Brotherhood has claimed that the Israeli intelligence service Mossad may be behind the attack. In a statement, the group said: "This crime can be attributed to the Mossad, which has been seeking to abort the (Egyptian) revolution since it started." This has been rejected as "ridiculous" by Israel. "This is not even an accusation. This is someone on automatic pilot just sending out their generic blasting of Israel," said a spokesman for Israel's Foreign Ministry, Yigal Palmor. The Israeli Foreign Minister Avigdor Lieberman has told Israel Radio that Egypt knows the attackers were radical Islamists. Gaza tunnels blocked Meantime security officials in Egypt say the country has begun to seal smuggling tunnels into the Gaza Strip. "There are preparations to close the tunnels," a security official told the news agency AFP. The tunnels are used to smuggle people in and out of Gaza, in addition to food and fuel. jr/mz (AFP, dpa, Reuters)


Egypt's parliamentary polls peter out For three years Egyptians waited for the chance to elect a new legislative branch, but when the final phase of voting came to an end on Wednesday, there was little suspense. Pro-government candidates dominated the first two rounds, Islamist parties were absent and voter turnout was low. When runoffs began this month, even fewer turned out to cast votes. So, in the final days polling stations were bare. "Complete silence at polling stations in Beni Suef City," read a headline in Egyptian newspaper Youm7 after the first day of run-off elections, showing pictures of deserted polling stations. Now, as the new parliament dominated by wealthy businessmen, former security officials and Egypt's old guard prepares to convene before the end of the year, critics say the body will be little more than a rubber stamp on authoritarian rule. Permalink http://p.dw.com/p/1Gp9A While results from the remaining electoral run-offs that took place this week continued to come in, official results from earlier rounds showed that supporters of President Abdel-Fattah el-Sissi had swept the polls. In the absence of a political party, "For the Love of Egypt," a pro-Sissi electoral list led by former security officer Sameh Seif Elyazal swept all list seats, winning a total of 120 seats. Official results released by Egypt's High Elections Commission also showed businessmen would make up to 25 percent of the parliament. Former party members of ousted president Hosni Mubarak's National Democratic Party also made a comeback in the elections, with 80 former parliamentarians from the party winning new seats. The 2015 parliament also includes 75 police and army officers, the largest number of former security members in the history of Egyptian parliaments. The police and army have always played a major role in Egyptian politics To Sissi with love Seif Elyazal, the "For the Love of Egypt" leader, announced last weekend that he would form the first parliamentary bloc called the "Pro-Egyptian State Coalition," a majority parliamentary bloc aimed at defending Sissi's policies. "In any parliament in the world, in any country anywhere, one party that gets over 50 percent has to lead the parliament, in order to ... push the parliament in the right direction, from the view of that party," said Seif Elyazal in an interview with DW, as to why he was forming the bloc. Since his election in June 2014, Sissi has held legislative powers in the absence of a parliament and passed hundreds of laws by presidential decree. In 2012, an Egyptian court dissolved the country's parliament that had been dominated by the Muslim Brotherhood which swept elections following the 2011 revolution. The government has touted the election of the new parliament as an important step in the country's transition following the military ouster of Islamist President Mohamed Morsi, whose Muslim Brotherhood group has since been labeled a terrorist organization and banned from elections. The formation of a pro-government bloc has sparked criticism that the chamber will turn into a rubber-stamp parliament. Power over parliament "All of this is to obtain power over the parliament in order to be able to vote in majority on orders received by telephone, under the control of security bodies," said Egyptian talk show host Ibrahim Eissa, last Sunday on his show on Al-Qahera Wal Nas channel, lashing out at "For the Love of Egypt." "Anyone claiming the opposite would be lying to the people." Some parties also declined to join. "Our party is not intending to join this coalition, we will remain as a party with its own party and group in the parliament to achieve our electoral promises," Chehab Waguih, spokesman of the Free Egyptians party, told DW. The Free Egyptians Party, a liberal party founded by Egyptian billionaire and telecom mogul Naguib Sawiris, won the largest percentage of party seats but not enough to form a majority. Waguih added that it was "too early to judge" whether or not a pro-government coalition within the parliament would have a negative effect on the parliament's ability to serve as a check on executive power. Will parliament merely rubber-stamp Sissi's laws? But despite the controversy, even elected members of government who were critical of the bloc were sure to state their support for the current government, highlighting what many say is a lack of true opposition in the parliament. "It will look like a new Mubarak-style ruling party with Elyazal looking like another Ahmed Ezz but in a different form," said Mortada Mansour, the controversial chairman of Cairo's Zamalek sporting club who won a seat in the parliament, at a press conference. Mansour was referring to the business tycoon who acted as Mubarak's parliamentary whip. Lack of debate, widespread apathy As the parliament looks set to fall in line with the president, observers and analysts say the election results are the product of a lack of competition and debate, widespread apathy and an electoral law set up for the prominent and wealthy to win. Still, while most believe the parliament will not pose a threat to the executive, it could choose to flex its power. "In some ways it will be a return to the past - the regime has nothing fundamental to fear from this parliament," Nathan J. Brown, a scholar of Middle Eastern law and politics at George Washington University, told DW. "In some ways it is different from most Mubarak-era parliaments: there is no formal opposition that seems to be emerging; ideological parties are particularly weak; Islamists are all but absent. And there is no National Democratic party to organize the pro-government members." Brown said from now on laws cannot be issued by presidential decree and a parliamentary majority will have to be mobilized. Other members could try to exercise power over members of cabinet that it will be required to approve. "And of course, there is the library of decree-laws that Sissi has issued - all those will have to be reviewed by parliament immediately," said Brown. "It is unclear if the parliament will be totally supine or actually try to read the laws it is asked to approve."


Egyptian military brutality seen as final act of desperation It seems Egypt's military is proving that it doesn't need a dictator to torture and brutalize its people. So is the revolution that broke out in Tahrir Square in February unravelling, or can nothing stop democracy now? Cairo has now erupted in violence for the fifth day running. Egyptian troops and riot police, controlled by the Supreme Council of the Armed Forces (SCAF) raided the city's Tahrir Square early on Tuesday in their latest attempt to evict protesters, reportedly killing four of them in the process. This week's violence began when protesters conducted a sit-in around the cabinet offices in Cairo to signal their rejection of the military's appointment of Kamal Ganzouri as prime minister. Ganzouri announced that no violence would be used to break up the demonstration, but it did not take long for the military to attack. At least 13 civilians have been killed since clashes began on Friday, and tragically much of the fighting is centered on Tahrir Square, the scene of unbound celebration when President Hosni Mubarak was ousted in February. Thousands of protesters have taken to the streets every day Soldiers with Molotov cocktails Independent journalist Muhammad Mansour, who has been at the protests every day, said the soldiers have been fighting the protesters with their own weapons to sow confusion. "There were some guys on the roof of the cabinet office, throwing stones," he told Deutsche Welle. "They were wearing civilian clothes, but they are from the army, because there was a guy in uniform standing with them. On the ground there were also soldiers, throwing stones and Molotov cocktails." "They are attacking women and stripping them in the street, and beating them," Mansour continued. "They went to the mosque and didn't take off their boots when entering. Some people say this is not our army. The army is not protecting us, it's just beating us." Some observers have suggested that the army has lost control of its soldiers, but Maha Azzam, associate fellow at Britain's Chatham House think tank, doesn't believe this. "I think there are orders from SCAF that they want Tahrir Square cleared and they don't want sit-ins," she said. "The orders have probably been ‘deal with the protesters,' and then the soldiers on the ground have taken it upon themselves to deal with them the way they want to."   New age, old tactics The SCAF has been in official control of Egypt since Mubarak's fall, and presented themselves as the "guardians" of the transition to democracy. But the army was also the dictator's chief instrument of repression throughout the three decades of his rule, and reports from the ground suggest that its tactics have been carried over seamlessly into post-Mubarak Egypt. Activists have been kidnapped, interrogated and beaten. Even before the current riots began, Tahrir Square had been cleared violently several times in the past few months. Even members of parliament, elected recently in the country's first democratic elections for decades, have reportedly been beaten up by military police. According to Mansour, the protesters refuse to be cowed. "When the police open fire they run away, but then they turn back," he said. "People are scared, but they have a faith, and I have heard people say they want to die here. They are ready to die. You cannot generalize - some are just coming to see the situation - but some of them are ready to die." There has also been shocking evidence of the military's targeted attacks on women in recent days, after footage of a woman being stripped and stamped on by riot police went round the world. "This systematic degradation of Egyptian women dishonors the revolution, disgraces the state and its uniform and is not worthy of a great people," US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said in response. Confused, desperate self-preservation But it's unclear what the military's ultimate goal is, since they cannot hold on to power indefinitely. The parliamentary elections, which began at the end of November, have ensured that Egypt is on the road to democracy. The presidential election is expected to be held by July 2012. The military is rapidly losing the recognition it held as the guardians of the transition.  Some of the protesters are reportedly prepared to die for the revolution  "What we're seeing is a complete breakdown of the relationship between SCAF and wider political opinion in Egypt," says Azzam. "I think at one point there was sympathy for the military and the fact that it could maintain a degree of security in the country, I think it's now losing whatever support it had." And resistance from legitimately elected parties is hardening. News surfaced Tuesday that prominent political personalities and newly elected MPs, including members of the Democratic Alliance, led by the Muslim Brotherhood's Freedom and Justice party, are planning to stage a sit-in at Cairo's supreme judiciary court. "I don't know what the army's goal is," says Mansour. "I don't know what they are trying to get out of this situation, but I'm sure that they are confused. They don't know how to run the country. They don't have the political awareness or experience." No truce with killers Azzam also thinks the SCAF's violent repression is a desperate attempt at self-preservation. "I think the SCAF are nervous," she said. "Because they're worried that they will be held accountable for the death toll of protesters - and that is causing them to miscalculate." That miscalculation means the military is digging itself deeper and deeper into a hole. Mansour believes that public opinion has now turned thoroughly against the SCAF. "I've been here since Friday," he said. "I'm supporting the protesters for humanitarian reasons, but you find a variety of people there. You also find people who support the SCAF, but they get kicked out. There was a religious cleric there who was trying to tell demonstrators to make a truce with the military, but people were very angry and kicked him out. Because there's no truce - how can you make a truce with soldiers, special forces, who are killing their people?" Author: Ben Knight Editor: Rob Mudge


Egyptian protesters and police clash in Port Said Egyptian protesters have clashed with police in the canal city of Port Said after a funeral procession, injuring several people. Part of a government complex was also set on fire in a second day of violence in the city. Clashes erupted on Monday when protesters threw rocks at the police headquarters, which is located in a government complex. Police responded with tear gas, but military forces in the city stood by during the exchange. Medical officials said at least eight people were injured by birdshot. A fire was reportedly started on the ground floor of the security headquarters and rescuers were unable to reach the area. The violence followed a funeral procession for civilians killed in clashes with police the day before. Sunday clashes Port Said's recent unrest has been fueled by anger over death sentences handed down earlier this year to local football fans for their role in a deadly February 2012 stadium clash. The turmoil escalated again Sunday evening in clashes that killed six people - three civilians and three policemen. Hundreds were injured in the violence, which also involved the military. Troops tried to break up the fighting, and at some points opened fire over the heads of police. The interior ministry said in a statement that unknown assailants had randomly attacked police and army personnel in the city "with the aim of creating sedition and divisions" between them, urging local residents "to stay away from groupings near government buildings." The military deployed troops and vehicles to escort Monday's funeral procession. "The interior ministry [officials] are cowards!" chanted angry mourners during the march. They also demanded that Islamist President Mohammed Morsi "leave." Port Said violence In January, a Cairo court sentenced 21 people, mostly fans of local football club Al-Masry, for their role in stadium violence last year that left over 70 people dead. More than 40 civilians were killed in ensuing protests over the verdicts, with many residents accusing local police of using excessive force. Rather than siding with the protesters, Morsi has been supportive of security forces and labeled protesters in the city "thugs," sparking outrage among the local population. For nearly three weeks, Port Said, which lies on the Mediterranean coast at the mouth of the Suez Canal, has seen protests, strikes and work stoppages, including the blocking of a major airport. Sunday's violence was the military's most dramatic involvement in Egypt's latest unrest, and has raised concern the military could again take on a more political role in the country. The Supreme Council of the Armed Forces (SCAF) ran the country during the tumultuous period between longtime strongman Hosni Mubarak's ousting in February 2011 and when Morsi took office in June of last year. Egypt has seen nationwide protests in the past few months, with the country deeply divided between Morsi's mainly Islamist allies and opposition groups that say the president has failed to meet the goals of the revolution. Morsi has been criticized for following in the footsteps of Mubarak, not carrying out reforms and trying to install a more religiously conservative government. dr/pfd (AP, AFP, Reuters, dpa)


Egypt's revolution still simmers in Cairo's Tahrir Square Although former Egyptian president Hosni Mubarak was toppled months ago, young activists are dissatisfied with the pace of political change. Demonstrators are questioning the transitional military council's intentions. It is oppressively hot on Tahrir Square in the heart of Cairo where the sun burns down mercilessly on the tent camp that demonstrators set up 10 days ago. Tents large and small haphazardly dot the area with large white sheets stretched between them to provide shade. A family from upper Egypt has sat down there to get a reprieve from the sun and next to them a barber cuts the hair of the revolutionaries. Young people distribute water and leaflets, and in the middle of the crowd stand the cameras of television journalists from the major Arab networks as well as the numerous small broadcasters. Hadir, Hiba and Islam sit in a large white tent with their friends. They are young Egyptians who have been participating in the recent demonstrations against the military council. "We are going to stay here until our demands are met," Hadir , a young woman with a serious face underneath her blue head scarf, told Deutsche Welle "Our wishes are the wishes of the revolution that began on the 25th of January," she continues. "Up until now only two of our demands have been met: the resignation of Mubarak and the dissolution of the parliament." The fact that Prime Minister Essam Sharaf has reshufflled his cabinet and fired some ministers finds little resonance with the demonstrators. Their demands have not been fulfilled, says Hadir. They want the police officers responsible for the deaths of scores of protestors to be punished. Members of the Mubarak regime should also be brought to court. And resources must be better distributed and civilians should no longer be brought before military tribunals. Elections or new constitution? The other young activists in the tent excitedly jump into the conversation. They all want the military to abdicate the power that it assumed after Mubarak's ouster. The generals, they say, are trying to divide the people in order to cement their power. In a prepared statement that General Mohsen el Fangary read to the public a few days ago, he warned the demonstrators not to disturb the public peace. At the same time, he rejected demands that the military tribunals be abolished. Demonstrators remain in Tahrir Square day and night Fangary added that the military leadership is not ready to hand over power. It wants to stick to the plan to hold parliamentary elections first, then create a new constitution and afterwards finalize presidential elections. But many human rights organizations demand that the process be reversed as in Tunisia, according to Bahey el din-Hass with the Cairo Institute for Human Rights Studies. "It is in our interest to begin with the constitution, because the constitution would draw a red line for the parliament and the newly elected president," he told Deutsche Welle. Hassan pleads for a constitutional assembly to be called and to decide later about electoral laws. The postponement of the elections from September to November does not cut it, he says. Tantawi has to go Regardless of when the elections take place, the demonstrators want General Tantawi - the head of the governing military council - to step down immediately. "Tantawi served Mubarak loyally for decades," says Hadir with outrage. "Should the thief's accomplice judge the thief?" The Interior Ministry's decision to let around 600 police officers go has not pacified the young demonstrators. Those officers would have gone into retirement shortly anyway, they say. The fact that they were forced out earlier than planned is not enough. They should be tried in a court and punished for their actions. "Everyone who was corrupt in the past 30 years has to be brought before a court," Hiba says. "We want to have a civil state, not a police state." The people in Tahrir Square are demanding an end to military rule. And they are not alone in the Arab world, according to the Jordanian journalist Rami Khoury, the director of a research institute in Beirut.  The revolution that began in January is far from over  "The Egyptian military has actually been in power uninterrupted since 1952," Khoury told Deutsche Welle. "That's the case for the entire Arab world. There is discontent everywhere and there are many reasons. One reason is the long rule of the political elites, who are supported by the military." How does it end? The young revolutionaries of Tahrir Square are bitter. With a courage that came from desperation, they faced attacks and persecution. Around 1,000 demonstrators were killed during the uprising while thousands more were injured, imprisoned, mistreated and tortured. Months after Mubarak's ouster, many still sit in prison. Don't the activists fear that the security forces will take action against them? Islam points to his upper body and mouth and says, "Here is my chest, and here is my tongue. I do not have anything else. I don't have any weapons." The women are not intimidated either. They are furious over what the security forces did to women after arresting them. After being detained, they were inspected by female doctors in order to find out if they were still virgins. Hadir has tears in eyes as she talks about it. As the sun goes down and a small breeze starts blowing, Tahrir Square fills with people. A steadily growing number of demonstrators are staying overnight in the tent village. The revolution in Egypt is far from over. Author: Bettina Marx and Diana Hodali / sk Editor: Rob Mudge


State of emergency in Egyptian cities following new violence President Mohammed Morsi has declared a state of emergency in three Egyptian cities after new violence. At least six people were killed and hundreds injured in the canal city of Port Said during clashes with police. In a televised address Sunday evening, Morsi declared a state of emergency in Port Said, Suez and Ismailia. The three cities will have a curfew imposed "for 30 days starting at midnight (2200 GMT Sunday)" the president said. "I find the nation facing dangers, I will have to take stricter measures. This is my duty," said Morsi. The president also invited Egypt's opposition forces to a dialogue starting on Monday. Unrest in Port Said Crowds tried to storm three police stations Sunday and others torched an army social club, looting items inside, security officials said. One of victims was an 18-year-old male who died of gunshot wounds to the chest Port Said's head of hospitals, Abdel Rahman Farag, told the Reuters news agency. Hundreds were injured, including 429 who suffered from tear gas inhalation and another 38 wounded by gunshots, said Farag. The military has been deployed in Port Said and the nearby canal city of Suez to help restore calm and protect vital public buildings. Thousands had gathered in Port Said for the funerals of those killed during earlier clashes on Saturday, with many chanting against President Mohammed Morsi. "Our city is being hit by the interior ministry!" and "Down with the Brotherhood rule!" people chanted, referencing the Islamist group that backs Morsi. Saturday violence On Saturday, 31 people were killed and around 300 injured in Port Said when policeman clashed with protesters. The violence followed a Cairo court ruling sentencing 21 people to death for their roles in the deadly violence last year at Port Said Stadium. In February 2012, 74 people were killed and hundreds more injured during clashes at a game between local football club al-Masry and Cairo club al-Ahly. Another 52 defendants are being tried over the violence, which many believe was orchestrated by police or supporters of former President Hosni Mubarak. The al-Ahly club and its 'ultras' faction of fans played a key role in the protests that ousted Mubarak two years ago. All fatalities during Saturday's clashes in Port Said were due to gunfire, medical officials told the AFP news agency. There was no police presence in Port Said Sunday, and shops remained closed for a second day. Al-Masry fans and families of the defendants said the case was politically motivated - with no police or al-Ahly supporters sentenced on Saturday. A restless week The weekend clashes followed a day of rioting in Suez and deadly protests in Cairo against Morsi. At least eight people were killed during fighting in Suez Friday. Protesters stormed four police stations, freed 25 detainees and seized weapons, security sources said. Meanwhile, the violence in Cairo extended into Sunday, with police firing teargas at dozens of stone-throwing protesters in the vicinity of Tahrir Square - the epicenter of the 2011 revolution. The protesters accuse Morsi of betraying the democratic goals established during the revolution. The British and US embassies, both near Tahrir Square, were closed for public business on Sunday. Political tension The recent unrest across Egypt highlights the political divide in the country. The opposition has threatened to boycott upcoming parliamentary elections if Morsi does not find a "comprehensive solution" to the unrest. The National Salvation Front, the main coalition of opposition parties who oppose Egypt's ruling Islamist government, said they would "not participate" in the polls unless a "national salvation" government was formed. The European Union's foreign policy chief, Catherine Ashton, expressed "great concern" over the violence and urged authorities to "restore calm and order," appealing for restraint from both sides. dr/msh (AFP, Reuters, dpa, AP)


Thousands of Egyptians turn out for anti-Morsi protests Thousands of Egyptian protesters have clashed with security forces across Egypt as the country's political violence extended for an eighth day. The protests come a day after talks between rival political factions. Egyptians took to the streets on Friday after a week of deadly clashes, answering the call for rallies against Islamist President Mohammed Morsi. The largest crowds marched through the Suez Canal city of Port Said chanting, "Leave, leave, Morsi," with thousands also rallying in Cairo's Tahrir Square. After thousands of peaceful demonstrators had dispersed from the Egyptian presidential palace, youth threw about two dozen petrol bombs at the outer wall. Security forces responded with water cannons and volleys of tear gas. One Egyptian was reportedly killed. Earlier, Morsi said that security forces would deal "with the utmost decisiveness to enforce the law and protect state institutions" and blamed the opposition for sparking the violence. About 60 people have been killed in protests and clashes nationwide in the country's worst crisis since Morsi came to power last June. Clashes began on the eve of the second anniversary of the January 25 revolt that ousted Hosni Mubarak in 2011. The violence was revitalized when an Egyptian court handed down death sentences for 21 people for their role in a deadly football-related riot last year in Port Said. Friday's protests came one day after leaders of rival political factions, including the leading opposition group the National Salvation Front (NSF) and Morsi's Muslim Brotherhood. The groups signed a joint statement brokered by Muslim cleric Imam Ahmed al-Tayeb, head of the Al-Azhar Sunni Muslim institution, supporting "a serious dialogue" and condemning violence and called on police to "protect citizens." Opposition criticism Some members of the opposition sharply criticized its political leaders for holding the meeting. A statement read by activists, liberal politicians, actors and writers said, "The initiative didn't represent the core of the problem and didn't offer solutions but came to give more legitimacy to the existing authority." The Front's leaders, including Egypt's leading pro-democracy advocate Mohammed ElBaradei, described the allegations as "intentional attempt to split the ranks." "We brought down Mubarak regime with a peaceful revolution," ElBaradei tweeted. "We insist on achieving the goals the same way whatever the sacrifices and the barbaric suppression tactics." Egypt's presidency welcomed Thursday's agreement as "an important step on the road to re-establishing stability." hc/kms (Reuters, AFP, AP, dpa)


Egypt's revolutionaries struggle to get heard Ahead of Egypt’s run-off presidential poll, the young, progressive activists who formed the backbone of the country’s revolution are struggling to remain hopeful and relevant despite lacking a coherent position. On a recent weekday afternoon, there was a protest march in Cairo's Tahrir Square, but 26-year-old Egyptian activist Nihal Saad Zaghloul chose to stay at home. She gently joked with a few visitors as she offered them tea and coffee, but Nihal was noticeably on edge. She and two female friends were sexually assaulted in Tahrir a few days earlier while walking through a crowd of men. Her voice wavered and she struggled to keep her composure as she described the attack, in which her veil was pulled from her head and she was groped by dozens of men. "It was like they were animals on drugs or something," she told DW. "It wasn't normal. They were enjoying - it was, like, sadistic." Cairo is a difficult city for women. Catcalling, groping and unwanted sexual advances are not uncommon. A 2008 report from the Cairo Center for Women's Rights found that more than 80 percent of Egyptian women and over 90 percent of foreign women had reported being harassed, many of them on a daily basis. Perpetrators are rarely prosecuted. "The truth of the matter is that even in the more serious incidents, even in the rare cases when women do insist on filing a complaint, it never goes anywhere," Heba Morayef, an Egypt analyst with Human Rights Watch, told DW. Morayef says the Egyptian government and police simply don't take sexual harassment seriously.  Young Egyptian men taking part in a civilian patrol initiative to secure Tahrir Square Losing faith The assault came as a severe blow to Nihal, who had already begun to lose faith in a protest movement that has splintered and sputtered since forcing the ouster of Hosni Mubarak 16 months ago. Young progressives, whose impassioned street protests inspired their compatriots, have so far failed to form a coherent political movement and were walloped in the country's parliamentary elections, which saw the rise of Islamist parties including the well-organized Muslim Brotherhood. The failure of liberal and progressive groups to organize politically is perhaps best illustrated by the choice of candidates in Egypt's presidential election. In a first round of voting, liberal Egyptians didn't coalesce around one candidate; they split their vote among a few men. The race has come down to a runoff between Mohammed Morsi, the stolid but charmless candidate of the Muslim Brotherhood and Ahmed Shafiq, a former Prime Minister under Hosni Mubarak who has positioned himself as the law-and-order candidate and gleefully needles young activists in press conferences and television interviews. A growing movement aims to boycott the election and return to protests in Tahrir. "This whole thing in Tahrir right now, from my perspective, is really not as useful as it used to be," said Nihal. "The card of protesting and demonstration died. It burned." Nihal says she will vote for Mohammed Morsi, though she has some concerns about the conservative direction in which the Muslim Brotherhood appears to want to take Egypt. She believes that sitting out the election will pave the way for a win by Ahmed Shafiq, who has vowed to use force while cracking down on activists. "The first presidential round we made the mistake of looking for a candidate that will represent [revolutionary] ideas and methodologies and principles but this was incorrect," Nihal said. "Right now, the country needs us to be united and we need to choose one who will take care of the country and will bring us from rock bottom up to the skies - or at least above rock bottom a bit." Nihal isn't sure what form her activism will take from now on, but says she can't simply go back to the apolitical charity events with which she used to occupy her time.  Activist Nihal Saad Zaghloul attending an anti-sexual harassment rally in Tahrir Square Return to Tahrir A few days after the assault in Tahrir, Nihal returned to the square, this time as part of a rally against sexual harassment, which she helped to organize along with a 22-year-old engineering student, Abd el Fattah Mahmoud. Mahmoud became outraged after reading a blog post that Nihal wrote about the incident. "This square harbored revolutionaries," Abd el Fattah told DW, explaining why he chose to form a civilian initiative to protect women in Tahrir. "It witnessed the birth of a revolution. [Women] don't deserve this kind of treatment here." Nihal stood with about 50 other women who held homemade signs and chanted against harassment. The women were ringed by young men in neon yellow vests, members of Abd el Fattah's civilian security patrol. "It feels a bit awkward and strange, but seeing all these people supporting us, it just feels better," Nihal said from behind the cordon of men. The rally was scheduled to end at sunset and as dusk descended the group disbanded and most participants headed for home. A few stayed behind in the square. As night fell, they were attacked by a mob of men. The women and their male protectors fled and escaped without serious injuries. The attackers have not been identified. That night, Nihal Saad Zaghloul gave an interview on an Egyptian television program in which she decried the assault and demanded better for Egyptian women. At that moment, it seemed as if the young activist may have found a new calling. Author: Noel King, Cairo Editor: Rob Mudge


Cairo after the revolution


Violence in Egypt triggers new concerns They were united in their drive to topple Egypt's president Hosni Mubarak. But Christians and Muslims have now reverted back to violent sectarian fighting, sparking fears of new chaos in the country. A number of Egyptians on Thursday pointed the finger at the country's army for the death of 13 people during conflicts between Muslims and Coptic Christians in Cairo earlier this week. Quoting the website of the newspaper al-Masry al-Youm, German news agency dpa said one man, killed on the way back from work, was "definitely shot with government-issued bullets," his brother told the newspaper. Another protestor alleged he saw the army shoot a man. Egypt is experiencing the worst outbreak of religious violence since President Hosni Mubarak was toppled last month. In addition to the 13 people killed late Tuesday in the working class Cairo district of Moqattam, more than 140 were injured. Muslims had confronted Christians blocking a main road in protest of an arson attack on a church in a village south of the capital. Homes and factories were torched in the unrest and the Egyptian military fired shots in a bid to control the riots. On Wednesday, the Egyptian army forcefully cleared Cairo's Tahrir Square after armed men attacked hundreds of pro-democracy activists. Stone-throwing skirmishes raged, and activists were gathering sticks and stockpiling rocks to defend themselves. Police to be redeployed Christian Coptic and Muslim clashes took a violent turn Egypt's new cabinet, led by Prime Minister Essam Sharaf, said it was watching the tensions between Muslims and Christians "with concern." Following its first meeting on Wednesday, it warned of a "counter-revolution" by diehards of the old regime. The country's military council, who took charge after Mubarak stepped down, has also called for national unity, warning of the dangers of anarchy. In a statement, the cabinet said it had "ordered the swift return of police forces, in their full capacity, back to the streets" and "urged citizens to cooperate with the police." No functioning police force has been in place since Mubarak stepped down. The police was despised under the president as an enforcer of his autocratic rule. US State Department spokesman Mark Toner said Washington had no indications that the military condoned the violence or might be behind it. The US called on the military authorities to prosecute those behind the sectarian clashes. "We have urged the Egyptian transitional government to act swiftly to bring the perpetrators of that violence to justice," Toner told reporters. He called on Egyptians to "remember the sense of unity" they had when they called for Mubarak's ouster in Tahrir Square. US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton will travel to Egypt, as well as Tunisia next week, as the first Cabinet-level Obama administration official to visit either country since unrest exploded across the region in January. "I intend to convey the strong support of the Obama administration and the American people, that we wish to be a partner in the important work that lies ahead," Clinton told a congressional panel on Thursday. ElBaradei will run for office  Meanwhile, reformist oppostion figure Mohamed ElBaradei announced that he will run in Egypt's presidential election this year as long as a new democratic system is in place.  ElBaradei was expected to announce his candidacy for president  "When the door of presidential nominations opens, I intend to nominate myself," ElBaradei said on his first live talk show on the privately-owned ONTV channel. He also said he would vote against constitutional amendments being put to a referendum on March 19, calling for a new constitution instead. The Nobel laureate and former head of the UN nuclear agency said that the new constitutional amendments were "superficial." He appealed to Egypt's military rulers to scrap them or delay the vote on them. "The current constitution fell," ElBaradei said. "It would be an insult to the revolution if we decided to retrieve this constitution." The proposed changes limit the terms for a president to run to two four-year terms. They also open the door for independents and opposition members to run. But the 68-year-old ElBaradei said the changes didn't limit the powers of president or give enough time for political parties to form. Calls for a different timeline The Supreme Council of the Armed Forces said when it took over power it would hold a parliamentary election in June followed by a presidential ballot six weeks later. But ElBaradei said there should be a new constitution, a presidential vote and then a parliamentary vote instead. "We are going in the opposite direction," ElBaradei said. The army's plan to hold the parliamentary vote in two months' time, before a new constitution was even drawn up, would exclude most Egyptians from the voting process, he added. Critics have said the timetable was too soon for parties to organize. This gave remnants of Mubarak's National Democratic Party and the Muslim Brotherhood an advantage. "If we go ahead with these amendments, this means we would have a parliamentary election within two months where 80 percent of Egyptians, the silent majority, would not have a chance to participate in a real parliamentary process," ElBaradei said. Author: Sabina Casagrande (AFP, Reuters, AP, dpa) Editor: Rob Mudge


Egyptian presidential candidate injured in attack Armed assailants have attacked one of Egypt's presidential candidates during a carjacking, resulting in his hospitalization. It was unclear whether or not the attack had a political motivation. A prominent Egyptian presidential candidate was attacked by armed assailants in the outskirts of Cairo and hospitalized in an intensive care unit after suffering a brain concussion, the politician's aides said on Friday. Sixty-year-old Abdel Moneim Abol Fotoh was returning home from a campaign event in the city of Munufeya, located 82 kilometers northwest of Cairo, when three masked men carrying machine guns stopped his car. "They beat him on the head repeatedly, took the car and ran," said campaign team member Ahmed Osama. "He is now in the intensive care unit and conscious." Security concerns Fotoh's driver was also wounded in the attack, according to police. It was not clear whether the assault was politically motivated or a simple robbery. Security has been a major concern since former president Hosni Mubarak was toppled in a popular revolution in February 2011. The Muslim Brotherhood, whose Freedom and Justice Party won the recent parliamentary elections, expelled Fotoh from its ranks after he defied its decision to not put up a presidential candidate. The brotherhood decided not to field a candidate in order to ease concerns at home and abroad about Islamists dominating the political process in Egypt. Fotoh is considered one of the more prominent candidates in the election. Registration for the presidential contest opens on March 10, with the election scheduled to take place before the end of June. slk /ipj (AFP, Reuters, dpa)


Insecurity hurts Egypt's tourism industry Egypt is trying jumpstart its economically vital tourism industry by attracting western vacationers again. But the security situation and talk of alcohol and bikini bans are complicating the effort. "Only when it's calm outside is there work fur us," says Rami Badr as he looks through the glass façade of his travel agency onto Tahrir Square. Colorful posters with inexpensive travel deals hang all over his office, but nobody is taking him up on those offers. The long-desired flood of tourists still has not arrived. There could hardly be a better location for this travel agency than Tahrir Square, which lies in the middle of the heart of Cairo. The square, however, was the center of the protests that toppled the former strongman Hosni Mubarak from power over a year ago. To this day, protesters are camping out in the square, demanding the resignation of the governing military council - clashes with the police are common. For the 25-year-old Rami Badr, as well as the other managers of travel agencies in the center of Cairo, every new disturbance is an economic disaster. Unemployed travel agents Ramid Badr in his travel agency For the past year, travel agents have suffered massive losses. Badr and others in the industry supported the revolution from the very beginning. One year ago, still in a euphoric mood, they hoped that the ouster of Mubarak would usher in a new era for tourism in Egypt. Moataz Sayed, with the tour guide trade union, also counted on a positive effect from the revolution. "Foreign tourists are always interested in the broader situation in their vacation destination," Sayed said. "That's why we hoped after the revolution that Egypt would become more attractive to western tourists if democracy took root and human rights were respected." Yet the events of the past months and the poor security situation have scared many visitors. Western tourists are travelling to Egypt clearly less frequently. Approximately 70 percent of the tour guides in his trade union have become unemployed as a consequence of the revolution, according to Sayed. "Many of my colleagues don't know how they can feed their family anymore," he said. That's a major problem for the Egyptian economy, says Sayed. It's estimated that one out of seven Egyptians make their living either directly or indirectly from the tourist industry, whether they work as tour guides, restaurant operators, carriage drivers, travel agents or sell souvenirs. The tourism industry and its dependent branches account for around 10 percent Egypt's economy. In addition, tourists bring a lot of foreign currency into the country. Security situation Sayed believes all Egyptians have a duty - all citizens are responsible for the image of their country abroad. He adds that the security situation in Egypt is not as bad as it is portrayed in the media and perceived abroad. With the exception of the kidnapping of two South Korean tourists in the Sinai Peninsula in February 2012, there have been no targeted attacks against tourists in Egypt, according to Sayed. "For a country that is in the middle of upheaval, that's reassuring overall," he said. A miniature sphinx replica on display at last year's ITB The representatives of the Egyptian tourism industry try to communicate this message - that there's no reason to panic - to potential customers in Germany. The state tourism office organized informatory trips for German travel agents in the run up to the ITB Berlin, a travel trade show, in a bid to encourage them to make Egypt one of their destinations again. That's no easy task, according to Mohamed Gamal, the general director of the Tourism Department in Egypt's General Consulate. Gamal says that they are trying to again  attract more German tourists to the spas on the Red Sea and the cultural locations like Luxor. A television channel has been created for this purpose, showing Egypt "from its most beautiful side" to German television viewers. German market There are no official travel warnings for the target destinations, although other regions and certain places in Cairo are considered unsafe. The German Foreign Ministry describes the travel situation in Egypt for foreign tourists as follows: "Trips to Egypt should, until further notice, be restricted to the Cairo metropolitan area (with the exception of Cairo city center and the area around Tahrir Square and the television building Maspero), the vacation spots on the Red Sea, the tourist centers in upper Egypt (particularly Luxor, Aswan, Nile cruise trips) and the guided tours in the White and Black Deserts. The Foreign Ministry advises against taking trips to the remaining parts of Egypt due to an unclear and unstable security situation." Gamal hopes that, despite the travel warning, more Germans will come to his country. "Germany represents an important market for us," he said.  Even in the critical year of the revolution, more than 900,000 Germans visited Egypt. Only Russians and the English were better represented. "Earlier, however, at least 1.3 million German visitors came to us annually," Gamal said. "Our goal is to reach this mark again." Fear of Islamic law The Red Sea and its beaches is a magnet for tourists Western vacationers, however, are not just scared off by TV images of violent clashes in Cairo. There are also the comments by individual Islamic politicians who have spoken out in support of a ban on alcohol. In addition, some would like to forbid the wearing of bikinis in public at Egyptian spas. Although a large majority of Islamists of different colors currently sits in parliament, Gamal believes that it's "nearly impossible" for them to pass bans that would effect western tourists. Sayed, from the Egyptian tour guide trade union, is optimistic on this point. The Muslim Brotherhood as well as the more radical Salafists have shown themselves to be "very cooperative" during conversations on this issue. Many Islamists had little conception how important the tourism industry is for the Egyptian economy, Gamal said. His lobby work aims to create a stronger awareness of this reality. Above all, the goal is to profile Egypt more strongly as a travel destination for cultural experiences. In other words, the cultural tourists are wanted instead of the party tourists. However, one can hardly regulate what foreign guests should eat or drink. Author: Khalid El Kaoutit, Amira Rahman / slk Editor: Neil King


Shooting deaths at pro-Morsi sit-in halt negotiations with Egyptian government The Islamist al-Nour party has suspended negotiations aimed at forming an interim Egyptian government. The announcement came in direct response to early-morning violence that left dozens of pro-Morsi supporters dead. Clashes on Monday brought talks between the Egyptian military and the ultraconservative al-Nour party to a halt. The Salafist party had supported the armed forces' removal of President Mohammed Morsi last week. However, a deadly shooting at a pro-Morsi demostration swiftly reversed al-Nour's cooperative efforts, according to its spokesperson. Permalink http://p.dw.com/p/193pT Over 40 people, including one army officer, were killed early on Monday when shots were fired outside of the Republican Guard barracks, according to medical officials. Demonstrators calling for the reinstatement of the deposed leader had been staging a sit-in outside of the building. The Muslim Brotherhood blamed the casualties on Egyptian security forces attempting to disperse the crowd. Military officials speaking on the condition of anonymity said the violence began when "terrorists" attempted to storm the building. However, they have not confirmed who was responsible for the deaths. Several people were killed at the same site last week. The Muslim Brotherhood called for "an uprising" against "those trying to steal their revolution with tanks," according to a statement issued several hours after the clashes. Prominent liberal leader Mohamed ElBaradei - who had been considered for the post of prime minister over the weekend - called on all sides to remain peaceful. "Violence begets violence and should be strongly condemned. Independent Investigation [is] a must. Peaceful transition is [the] only way," ElBaradei posted in English on Twitter. Egyptian authorities' arrest of Muslim Brotherhood leaders and increasing crackdowns on their demonstrations have worsened tensions with the Islamist group since Morsi's ouster. On Friday, Muslim Brotherhood supreme leader Mohammed Badie called on supporters to hold fast to the streets until Morsi's return to office. Mass protests across Cairo over the weekend prompted the military to deploy troops throughout the capital city amid fears of violence. An army statement warned against "provocative actions," and said that violations would be "dealt with decisively, under the law." Egypt awaits new premier Prior to the bloodshed, Egyptians had expected the announcement of a new interim prime minister on Monday. The Egyptian military handed power to the head of the country's Supreme Constitutional Court, Adly Mansour, with the promise of forming a transitional government to oversee the country until elections could be held. Since last week, the interim president's office has attempted to nominate two liberal-minded candidates for prime minister, both of which the al-Nour party rejected. Transitional President Mansour's office first proposed the appointment of opposition leader Mohamed ElBaradei to the prime minister's post. However, the group objected to the Nobel Peace Prize winner and Morsi rival, saying he would have been a divisive premier. The president's office then proposed appointing the center-left lawyer Ziad Bahaa Eldin and ElBaradei as vice president, according Mansour's media advisor Ahmed al-Muslimani. Al-Nour reportedly rejected the second nomination due to Eldin's past membership in the National Salvation Front, the main opposition coalition to Morsi. "Our position is that the prime minister should not belong to a specific faction…We want a technocrat," al-Nour head Younes Makhyoun told the Al-Arabiya television broadcaster. kms/pfd (AP, AFP, Reuters, dpa)


Focus: Egypt's revolution DW-WORLD gives you an inside look at the upheaval in Egypt and its impact on the world. Click here for full multimedia coverage of the events in Cairo and the region. A wave of anti-government protests has been rolling across the Middle East and North Africa, and Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak has stepped down. 
DW-WORLD looks at the events in Egypt and their impact on the region. DW-WORLD looks at the events in Egypt and their impact on the region.


The Arab Spring 2011: An incomplete revolution The Arab Spring promised democratic change across the Middle East and North Africa. While a number of oppressive regimes have fallen, the hoped-for paradigm shift has not fully materialized. Twelve months ago Gamal Mubarak, Saif Al Islam al Gadhafi and Ahmed Saleh all had very good career prospects. As children of Arab dictators, they were highly qualified and in a perfect position to rise to the office of head of state. Their fathers - Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak, Libya's revolutionary leader Moammar al Gadhafi and Ali Abdullah Saleh, Yemen's head of state - had all planned to pass their power and political office to their heirs. Each son had been groomed for succession. This seemed to be the easiest method to protect the influence and the wealth of these ruling families which had spent decades fostering these interests. Failure of the republican dictatorships However, each dictator had made a series of miscalculations. Since beginning of the Arab Spring, these three - plus Tunisia's Zine El Abidine Ben Ali - have been hunted out of office by an angry populace, their sons' career aspirations destroyed along with their fathers' regimes. A common belief still hangs in the air: the model of the republican dictatorships which has dominated the Arab world since the 1950s and 1960s has failed. Dictators like Gadhafi saw their dynasties meet a bloody end As far as the populations behind the Arab Spring are concerned, the fall of those regimes in counties which attempted to set up a hereditary dynasty has proven this. Meanwhile, the one son who succeeded his father - Bashar al-Assad, the heir to former Syrian president Hafiz Al-Assad - fights to retain the power that was handed down to him. But his days as a president also appear to be numbered. "Were the Assad regime to fall it would mark the definitive ending of the attempt to create 'republican dynasties' in the region," Dr. Kristian Ulrichsen, a Middle East and North Africa expert at the London School of Economics, told Deutsche Welle. "The downfalls of Gadhafi, Ben Ali and Mubarak have powerfully demonstrated the levels of popular disgust at the attempts to keep power firmly within the families of non-monarchical rulers," he added. "Already, the myth of these forms of dynastical succession has been shattered, and it is only a matter of time before the Assad regime falls victim too." The fall of the dictators appeared to create a possibility for real choices. Those Arabs which demonstrated for days, weeks and in some cases even months against the regimes that ruled them all shared the central demand of co-determination. The fall of the dictators promised them a say in the running of the nation which had long been denied them. However, in a relatively short time, the climate of hope surrounding the moves to the first free elections in many countries has vanished in some. In Tunisia, the Islamic Ennahda party has emerged as the strongest while in Egypt, an electoral victory for the Muslim Brotherhood is increasingly likely. Radical Salafists also look to take a short cut to power, despite faring less well in elections so far. With this potential move toward fundamentalism across the Arab Spring nations, the voices of the democrats, the bloggers, the women, the moderate Islamists and the founders of the revolutions seem to fade away. Disappointment of the democrats "It is not the democrats who have profited from the fall of regimes in the Arab world," Guido Steinberg, Middle East expert of the German Institute for International and Security Affairs, told Deutsche Welle. "Above all, it is the well-organized and increasingly well-financed Islamic movements which have mostly arisen from the Muslim Brotherhood." As well as Tunisia and Egypt, Yemen and Libya have also seen the Islamists emerging as the strongest and profiting most from the breakdown of the old order. Protestors fear "fraudulent elections, new dictatorship." Many advocates of democracy are disappointed by this development. The construction of real democracies, if any have really begun, moves extremely slowly. There are still very few signs of any emerging pluralistic societies and the serious economic and social problems which prompted some of the uprisings still remain unsolved. Tunisia's economy is still in deep trouble while the Egyptians also continue to struggle with huge economic problems. Since beginning of the Arab Spring, foreign investments have evaporated and the tourism industry has crumbled. At the same time, unemployment has increased and budget deficits in many countries have reached a dangerous level. In Yemen and Libya the whole economy has collapsed due to the reduction in oil production. The social crisis, high youth unemployment and desperate economic climate have forced many young people to leave their homelands. It is a situation ripe for the Muslim Brotherhood which was forbidden as a political force in many countries but was tolerated because of its good organizational structure and its social and community work. Many people look for such qualities in their leadership. Despite these developments, Norbert Lammert, president of the German Bundestag, has warned against too much pessimism. "We must not make the mistake of overlooking the chances that have arisen in these countries regardless of how difficult the discussions are and how substantial the problems are," he said. "Hopefully after the free elections in Egypt we can get to a level of parliamentary relations. This will change things - and also provide a new perspective on the question of economic relations." However that change, warns Kristian Ulrichsen, will not happen overnight. "Building a democratic culture inherently takes many years to achieve, and cannot be imposed or achieved in a single year," he said. "There will be ups and downs along the way, but the model of authoritarian leadership has been shattered, and governments will never again be able to claim any form of legitimacy from the practice. That is transformative."


Egyptian television allows newsreaders to wear headscarves A veiled anchorwoman has appeared reading the news on Egypt's state television for the first time. While the development was welcomed as a positive development by some, others fear it marks a move towards Islamism. The newsreader, Fatma Nabil, appeared for the first time on a midday broadcast dressed in a black suit and cream colored headscarf. Until the overthrow of President Hosni Mubarak last year, women wearing headscarves had been only been allowed to work behind the camera. Now, alongside Nabil - who had worked as a news editor - three more women who also passed screen tests will be able to appear as newsreaders wearing a headscarf. New Information Minister Salah Abdel Maqsud, a member of moderate Islamist President Mohammed Morsi's government, said on Saturday he could see reason for woman in a hijab from being prevented from reading the news. A day later, Nabil appeared on air. While wearing of the headscarf - common in Egypt - is seen as a personal decision, it was regarded as unacceptable in the state media under the secular administration of Mubarak, who banned it. The former president, who was in power for decades, was condemned by religious organizations for the move. Court ruling allows a first In January, an administrative court overruled the prohibition of veils, paving the way for the latest development. Since Egyptian television was established in 1960, no female presenter has worn a scarf. In the moderate Islamist Muslim Brotherhood's own daily newspaper Freedom and Justice, Nabil herself welcomed the development as a sign that the revolution had accomplished a major goal in doing away with the "strange and abnormal situation" in which veils were banned. "The veiled journalist suffered discrimination," Nabil was reported as saying by the English-language newspaper Delta World. However, others were less positive, voicing fears that it was an early sign that the regime would try to impose a regime of Sharia law in the longer term. "I only fear that the tide is turning and that, at some point, women without their heads covered will be banned from the television," female television journalist Mona Salman said in comments reported by the DPA news agency. President Mohamed Morsi stepped down from the Muslim Brotherhood when he was elected president in June to take over his new constitutional role. rc / av (AFP, dpa, dapd)


Academics, Internet activists confident in power of social media Many still believe in the power of the Internet to induce democratic change. However, others point out that the Tunisian and Egyptian cases are the exception, rather than the rule. Despite the recent unmasking of two supposed female lesbian bloggers who turned out to be straight men, many experts are still confident in the power of social networking to mobilize social change. Whether in Egypt, Tunisia or other global hotspots, many say that the Internet is a political catalyst. "The risk of getting caught is much less than if I go on the street," said Marie Möller, an economist at the University of Münster, in an interview with Deutsche Welle. "And in this way, people realized that they were not the only ones doing it, but others in other parts of the country - they were able to coordinate large protests. And if many people are in a certain place at the same time, the risk of being punished is much less." A chance to test the waters Möller calls this the "upstream coordination problem." She said that in one of her recent studies, she and her colleagues examined the cost-benefit analysis of people who live under dictatorships. There, the incentive for street protests is really low because people are afraid of severe punishment by the regime. However, she said, the Internet is a new way for protesters to coordinate and be effective. One of the most notable online voices from Tunisia has been Slim Amamou, a well-known Tunisian Twitter-user and blogger, who was jailed during the waning days of the Ben Ali regime, and for a brief time was in the post-Ben Ali government as the Secretary of State for Sport and Youth. "It's clear that this revolution surprised everyone," he said. "The power of social media and the Internet was never known to be able to reach this point. The case of Tunisia has proven this for the first time in history - of course it was important." A mixed blessing for social change  Beckedahl doubts that the Tunisian and Egyptian examples can be easily replicated However, some psychology experts note that it's not always easy to translate the simple click to join a Facebook group compared to actually going out in the street and protesting - in other words, that at least in the Egyptian and Tunisian case, that these were different stories. "Before people get on the street, they have to progress emotionally," said Peter Kruse, a professor of psychology at the University of Bremen. Kruse says this high degree of immediate, emotional shock "is no longer necessary" because protesters can read about it online first. "I think that now, these strong emotions are only coming from the side of conservative forces that want to maintain the status quo, and not so much from the active revolutionary side." However, it's important not to get too swept away in the romantic idea that Internet tools necessarily lead to democratic change, warns Markus Beckedahl, who edits the popular blog, Netzpolitik.org. He cited the example of China which has become notorious in exerting sophisticated, tight control over its national Internet. "We are witnessing an arms race between intelligence and censorship infrastructure and anti-censorship tools," Beckedahl told Deutsche Welle. Author: Andreas Noll / cjf Editor: Nathan Witkop


Your say: What Egyptians had to say about the two day constitutional referendum Voting in Egypt's constitutional referendum continued for a second day on Wednesday - the first time the country has voted since the ouster of President Morsi. Our Facebook users based in Egypt described the mood there. Polls are open for a second day amid heavy security after violence left eight people dead on Tuesday. DW English Facebook followers in Egypt had this to say about the constitutional referendum: Sherif:The June 30, 2012, revolution and the referendum on the constitution show that the Egyptian people deserve a democratic process. Internationally, it's a unique example. Samir: Every Egyptian was forced to vote YES in the referendum on the constitution. Voting NO could lead to an arrest. Momen:The active voter participation in the referendum shows how much Egyptians hate the Muslim Brotherhood and what [the movement has] done during one year in power. Mostafa: I did not vote and I know many others who did vote ad more people who did not. Ahmed: I voted with YES. All Egyptian are celebrating the new constitution. Streets are full of people who participated and there are national songs [being played] every where. Marwa: I abstained from voting because it is a coup Abdelrazek: The crowds only appear after noon, when the old regime tycoons stuff their company busses with their employees. [They] head towards places where the media is waiting. Sherif: I voted yes. I am very happy. Dina: Millions of Egyptians are voting and our police and army are protecting us. We are happy to get rid of Morsi and his gang. By the way, it was a revolution not a military coup. Ahmed: I voted yesterday and said YES. DW, please it was not a military coup, it was a complete revolution. (30 million people were in the streets isn't enough?) Azam: Another step to bring back the country under military rule! Tarek: No free person has voted in this bloody referendum. Only Mubarak supporters and thugs vote. Aya: Personally I did not vote as we all know that the results are going to be 'yes' to the constitution anyway. All the private and state media have been directing people to say 'yes'. All the main streets in Egypt are covered with 'say yes' posters. Khaled: I boycotted voting on the constitutional referendum because it's illegitimate. Amr: MB [Muslim Brotherhood] thugs have killed ten voters. Large queues are still waiting to vote. Ahmed: A small number of voters [are] in the streets and demonstrations [go]through the streets of the whole country. Mohamed: A great festival in Cairo, we are celebrating the new constitution. I wonder [why] you still call it a coup. This is really funny for us. Anyway, we are very happy today; people are dancing in streets and everywhere. Ahmed: All Egyptian people went [in large numbers] to vote. Only the pro-Morsi groups boycotted the vote. Some just made trouble!


Yearning for lost freedoms Well before the Arab Spring, Iranians rose up, albeit unsuccessfully, against their regime in the 2009 Green Revolution. A former diplomat talks about the Iranian take on the wave of Arab uprisings. Ali Granmayeh is a former Iranian diplomat who now teaches international relations at the School of Oriental and African Studies at the University of London. He is also a research associate at the university's Middle East Institute. Deutsche Welle: The perception of the Arab uprisings seems to vary hugely within Iran. Some draw parallels to the Green Revolution in 2009, while the regime compares the Arab Spring to the Islamic Revolution in 1979. Ali Granmayeh: The regime rejects any comparisons with 2009 and 2011. Instead it underscores that the Islamic Revolution was the origin of all uprisings in the Islamic world. The logic is clear: because 1979 led to the foundation of an Islamic state, all movements in the region should yield the same results. The only parallel the regime draws between the two historical dates relates to Syria, where the uprising is "instigated by foreign elements," as it felt it was in Iran in 2009. The Iranian people, however, think the exact opposite. Because they were the first to take to the streets in 2009, they feel that they started all the uprisings. As far as 1979 is concerned, the young generation is asking the older one: Why did you make such a great mistake, creating such a situation for us? Prior to 1979 there was freedom; now we have lost so much that we didn't expect to lose, such as women's rights. What did the Iranian government expect from the various Arab uprisings this year? It used its propaganda machinery to claim that the nucleus of each movement was an Islamic ideology. It wanted Islam-oriented parties to take power and is dissatisfied with the results. This is also true of Tunisia, where the Ennahda party led by Rashid Ghannouchi declared that it does not wish to establish an Islamic but rather a broad-based civil system. The same goes for Egypt's Muslim Brotherhood. Iran criticizes the brotherhood as being influenced by the West, which is encouraging it to move towards western-style democracy. At the same time, the regime knows very well that the only Egyptian movement that would like to establish an Islamic government is the Salafist movement, which is totally anti-Shia. So Iran is mainly using the term "Islamic ideology" to tell Egyptian society that Islamic tendencies have the right to have a share in their future government - nothing more than that. Iran maintains close ties to Syria Finally Libya: Iran never considered the unpredictable Moammar Gadhafi a good Muslim leader and is not very interested in the country. This is not the case with Syria, though. Here, Iran sides completely with the regime - even though there might be Islamists fighting in Syria, Iran knows that they are not against the West, and even though Bashar al-Assad's regime is the most secular regime in the Arab world. Syria is less an ideological question and more of a strategic question because of Hezbollah or Hamas. Some reports claim that Iran is assisting Syria not only financially but also with the deployment of fighters. There is, however, no proof of this. What can you tell us about this? It would be a huge mistake for the Iranian government, which emphasizes the rejection of any foreign interference, to allow members of the Revolutionary Guards to be physically involved in the suppression. It would give other countries that oppose Bashar al-Assad a reason to send in their own forces. As for members of Hezbollah being active, I don't know. Iranians don't speak the same language and would, therefore, be easily recognizable. Not so the Lebanese. However, as a Shia organization, Hezbollah depends much more on Iran than on the cooperation with Syria. So I suppose it is thinking more about its own survival than of that of Bashar al-Assad. The most delicate uprising for Iran is the one in Bahrain. Why is that? The question here is both ideological and strategic. Of course, Iran considers it the right of the Shia majority to take over, and the Bahraini Shia clergy - many of whom lived in Iran for years - expects some support. The fact that Bahrain is enhancing the power of Iran's regional rival, Saudi Arabia, which sent troops to suppress the revolt, is another problem. But Iran's hands are tied. I don't think it wants to do anything. Iran's foreign minister visited four of the GCC countries in May - Kuwait, Qatar, the United Arab Emirates and Oman - and assured them that Iran does not want to cause tensions in the region, knowing that such tensions would spread across all countries, including Iran itself. Last but not least, the government is aware of the necessity of having indirect contact with the West. Some GCC countries that depend less on Saudi Arabia, like rich and ambitious Qatar, accepted to act as a go-between. As a result, in every meeting with Qatar, Iran gets a message from Washington or the European Union, and I think it appreciates this. What has the atmosphere been like in Iran since the outbreak of the Arab uprisings? Do people think: we didn't make it in 2009, so let's try again? Or are they exhausted by the regime's repression? The climate is extremely tense. More and more people are deprived of playing a role in politics. In the past, liberal Muslims - followers of the first prime minister of Iran after the revolution - were excluded. Now the so-called Islamic pragmatists have been excluded, people who are reformist supporters of the Islamic regime, like Mohammad Khatami or Mir Hossein Mousavi, the leader of the Green Revolution. Where will this exclusion stop? It doesn't just affect politicians, but the whole of Iranian society. Take, for example, the Sunni minority that contributed to the formation of the Islamic government. They too fought against Saddam Hussein. They are not allowed to have prayers in Teheran for Eid al-Fitr, the feast that brings the month of Ramadan to an end. Instead they were asked to have a Shia imam leading their prayers, which is against their religious beliefs. So, people are more and more desperate. There seems to be no salvation for them. Interview: Mona Sarkis, Qantara.de Editor: Sabina Casagrande


Opinion: Female body under siege in post-revolution Egypt Egyptian writer Mansoura Ez Eldin sketches a bleak picture of post-revolutionary social conditions in her homeland, where she says women face political marginalization and are being robbed of their basic rights. While soldiers on Qasr al-Aini Street in Cairo set about roughing up female Egyptian protesters last month, the Salafists in Suez were holding spirited celebrations to mark their victory in the second round of elections. They struck up religious hymns and chanted slogans like "the military and the people are one," "the Muslim Brotherhood and the Al Nour Party are one" and, above all, "God and the people are one." Women did not participate at all. The "people" they are referring to are, of course, something different from the demonstrators. As far as the Salafists are concerned, "the people" refers exclusively to their own supporters. As the Salafists rejoiced in song at their unity with the military, members of this very same army were beating, kicking and dragging around a defenseless woman on the ground out on the street and - as if that weren't enough - tearing off her clothes as well. Neither this episode nor other sad examples of the abuse and killing of demonstrators while the protests were being broken up in front of the Council of Ministers' headquarters provoked the anger of the Islamists or other religious zealots, who invoke their own good morals day and night. Instead, they condemned the victim for leaving the house to demonstrate in the first place. Mansoura Ez Eldin's books have been translated into a number of languages Their response fits right in with the publicly propagated, misogynistic views and behavior of the Salafists. In an era when Egypt must tackle the many problems that have stacked up during 60 years of military dictatorship, these disciples of Islam (Salafists and Muslim Brothers in equal measure) view the body of a woman as the root of all evil. As a consequence, they see covering it up as their most pressing priority, all the while recklessly ignoring key issues such as repression, poverty, corruption and the decline in educational standards. It would appear that the debate over the female body has in the meantime become a priority for all factions of the Egyptian political spectrum, to varying degrees. The Islamists want to forcibly command that body back into the house and exclude it from the public arena. And while the Muslim Brotherhood calls for the female body to be covered up, the military lays it bare, beating and dragging it through the streets, or subjecting it to virginity tests in dark cells. Sections of the secular elite are narrowing the debate over women's rights down to just how much of her body a woman should be allowed to reveal. It's become a battle over face veils and bikinis. Quite apart from this conflict, the revolutionary Egyptian woman (whether her head is bare or she is veiled) is conducting her very own battle: She is demonstrating on the streets and in the squares of the nation hand in hand with her male comrades for dignity and freedom - in defiance of all those who want to prevent her from leaving the house at all, who criticize her political commitment or doubt her morality, because she courageously opposes the unscrupulous repression and systematic torture by soldiers and officers. In view of the current situation, the future for women may appear quite gloomy, but we must not forget that this is just one stage of a long and arduous path that Egyptian women have already made progress on in their campaign for better rights. We can be guided by a rich heritage. It would therefore be unfitting, as though it were our destiny to repeatedly reinvent the wheel, to allow ourselves to be ensnared in the old battles and debates over trivialities. Author: Mansoura Ez Eldin, Quantara.de Editor: Holly Fox Mansoura Ez Eldin was named as one of the best Arab-language authors under 40 in the year 2010. The same year, she was the only woman to be nominated for the "International Prize for Arabic Fiction." Her novel "Beyond Paradise" was published in English in 2009.


Contra: Ideologies are sabotaging modernization efforts Do the elections in Egypt prove that the dawn of democracy threatens to fail due to conservative ideologies? Yes, says Ute Schaeffer, Editor-in-Chief of DW-WORLD.DE. The events in the Arab world are bitterly confirming an old prejudice: Arab countries only have the choice between authoritarian regimes or Islamists. In Egypt, the authoritarian leader Hosni Mubarak is gone. But the country is being led by generals of the military council. They control Egypt's security and therefore also the people who turn against their authoritarian course - at any cost. Security forces are shooting at demonstrators, journalists are being detained, and people are being tortured in Egypt's prisons and police stations. Now, Islamist parties are taking the lead in the parliamentary elections. The ghosts of a dictatorship can't be shaken off so easily - not the multitude of competing intelligence services in Syria, not the omnipotent military in Egypt that has been powerful for decades, nor the overpowering bureaucracy of an enormous army of civil servants. Ute Schaeffer is Editor-in-Chief of DW-WORLD.DE and DW-RADIO "What you know is better than what you don't know" is also an expression in Egypt. Egypt and the Egyptians are not familiar with democracy, just like the majority of people in Arab countries. Since the end of colonialism, they have only experienced monarchies, military rule and authoritarian presidents. To put it bluntly: the Arab world has slept through the modern age. A worsening scenario This is no cause for arrogance. The West is partially to blame for much of this development by making the region a pawn of its own interests, well beyond the end of the Cold War. If the West doesn't support society's democratic movements in the Arab world more decisively now, the next decade will also be a missed opportunity for democracy and the rule of law in the region. The risks that are imminent should the democratic spirit not succeed have already become evident in Egypt: the storming of the Israeli Embassy in Cairo, the riots, violence and murder of the Coptic Christian minority, as well as the continuing violence against dissidents. These could all prove to be a mere prelude for further escalation should the revolutions fail. The danger of civil war and complete anarchy is at hand. But the question whether the protest movement has a wide base of support isn't only essential in Egypt. It is evident that the rural population supports Islamist streams and votes more conservatively. The military and Islamists have selected young democrats and the liberal middle-class as a common enemy and are collaborating. At the moment, it's questionable whether democratic powers can even capture this conservative fortress. Change is vital This means the Arab world is in danger of missing a further step toward modernization. It borders on deliberate political sabotage of this region's own development. Already now, the gross domestic products of all Arab countries are below that of Italy's! The unemployment rate in Egypt is some 20 percent. Though the region is ahead of Africa in terms of development indicators, it still falls behind most other parts of the world. The Arab region is already part of a worldwide exchange. The young generation in particular is globally networked via satellite television, Facebook and Twitter. Their connections cannot be cut, nor can this generational change be held up in the long run. However, as long as generals, apparatchiks, intelligence services and radical ideologists attempt to do so in order to secure their power for the short term, there will be no true peace in the region, no economic and social development. The democracy movements have drawn attention to this deficit. Now it's time for the self-proclaimed elite to realize it. Author: Ute Schaeffer, Editor-in-Chief, DW-WORLD.DE, DW-RADIO / sac Editor: Rob Mudge


Egyptians abroad demand right to vote Tahrir Square riveted the world this year with the passionate calls for democracy in Egypt. Nine months after Mubarak's ouster, non-resident Egyptians are still wondering if they will be permitted to vote this month. While Egypt's First Circuit Administrative Court of Justice issued a decision on October 25th allowing citizens to vote outside of Egypt, the ball is now in the court of the country's military rulers to put that decree into practice. The Egyptian Ministry of Foreign Affairs in Cairo estimates the number of citizens abroad at 10 million. One source said that there were 40 million Egyptians in Egypt who were eligible to vote in 2010, which would make the non-resident vote significant. In the UK, the Egyptian Consulate welcomed the decision on facebook. "We are happy and excited about the possibility of Egyptians voting abroad. We have worked extremely hard to convey the desires and wishes of our community in UK to authorities in Egypt for the past couple of years." In spite of this glowing response, multiple attempts to arrange an interview or obtain further offiicial comment went unanswered. There are around 10 million Egyptians living abroad The prime minister assured Egyptians Sunday that citizens outside of the country would be able to vote. However, measures must still be taken to carry out the court's order, and it is not clear when this will happen. An official from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs who asked not to be named said that he didn't know when the steps to accommodate voting from abroad would happen. Responding to a call for rallies in front of embassies around the world last weekend, frustrated Egyptians gathered in front of their London Embassy. They were joined by others in New York, Bern, Madrid, Stockholm, Melbourne, Ottawa and Hong Kong. Left behind? Azza Ahmed Zaik, who has been living in the UK for three years so that her son can obtain specialized medical care, helped organize the event. She also said she has been maintaining a daily vigil since June 29th. That was a day of intense clashes in Cairo resulting from frustration at the slow pace of justice for members of Mubarak's regime. "People abroad are very aware of the problems back in Egypt," she said. "Especially when you are abroad, you are not like in Egypt. You have felt the breeze of freedom and that you have this right [to vote]." Ahmed Zaik claimed that the ruling Supreme Council of the Armed Forces (SCAF) doesn't want the input of non-resident Egyptians and this is the reason for the delay on voting rights. Dr. Mariz Tadros, a fellow at the Institute of Development Studies focusing on democratization and Islamist politics, pointed out that while the SCAF has complained about the difficult logistics of organizing voting abroad, "they have completely refused international in technical provision, in technical capacity support in making the elections inclusive and open for all." One tension underlying voting from abroad regards the prominence that conservative Islam will play in the country's new government.  Egyptians abroad want their voices to be heard Some Egyptians worry about how conservative Islamic groups will influence Egypt's new government, but according to Tadros, the issue of non-residents obtaining the vote goes beyond this. "[T]heir ties to Egypt, in many cases, have continued to be just as strong as if they were living in Egypt. So they feel very strongly about their Egyptian citizenship, and they feel that one of the fundamental rights of their citizenship is to be able to convey their voices in what kind of state, what kind of government we want in the upcoming years." Pact of convenience At the same time, Tadros said, "we also know that the armed forces and the Muslim Brotherhood are in what the Muslim brotherhood have called 'a strategic pact'...so we know that in the light of this pact, the armed forces have certainly given more political freedoms and more political space for the Islamist parties to maneuver and engage politically than the liberal forces." The military may have its own reasons for favoring conservative groups. The Egyptian military and the arms industry account for roughly 40 percent of the country's economy. With many Egyptians abroad supporting the revolution and the military cracking down on internal dissent over the slow rate of change since Mubarak's fall, the Muslim Brotherhood may offer the armed forces a more convenient partnership. Author: Zoe Sullivan, London Editor: Rob Mudge


Alternative Nobel winner says non-violence works Known as the "Machiavelli of non-violence," Gene Sharp shares the 2012 Right Livelihood Awards with three others. He's written widely on non-violent political action, inspiring movements from Myanmar to Egypt. It may have started when he chose to become a conscientious objector and refused to serve in the Korean War of the 1950s. The US political theorist Gene Sharp, now 84, knew even back then that political revolution could be non-violent. That conviction - and his work over the past decades - has won Sharp a Right Livelihood Award, otherwise known as an "Alternative Nobel prize," in Stockholm. He shares the 150,000-euro ($195,000) prize with Sima Samar, an Afghan doctor, and Britain's Campaign Against Arms Trade. The 90-year-old Turkish environmentalist Hayrettin Karaca receives an honorary award. Sharp has been studying non-violent resistance for decades In an interview with DW on Thursday (27.09.2012) following the announcement of the award, Sharp noted: "It's a great honor, of course. And it shows that there's been increasing recognition in the past few months, and the past two years, of the importance of 'people power' or civil resistance. People are realizing: 'aha, there is something we can do. We do not need to passively submit to a person, we do not need to go over to violence and dictatorships. We can do something else and we can win.'" A public enemy If Sharp's 1973 book "The Politics of Nonviolent Action" was inspiring, it's been his philosophy of people power, as outlined in his 1993 publication "From Dictatorship to Democracy: A Conceptual Framework for Liberation," that has been earth-shaking. This how-to guide to toppling tyrants in non-violent fashion has been repeatedly reprinted and translated into over 30 languages - appealing to social activists around the world, from Serbia and Ukraine to Egypt and Myanmar. It is also said to have influenced protesters involved in the Arab Spring demonstrations of 2010-2012 and those of the Occupy movement. Ahmadinejad says Sharp was planning revolution in Iran But Sharp's pacifist philosophy has also triggered the wrath of regimes like those in Iran, which portrayed him as a public enemy in a propaganda video. The Iranian president, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, has warned that Sharp was planning a "velvet revolution" in Iran. Still, Sharp has remained modest about his impact, saying that he merely analyzed the weaknesses of all regimes. Pointing out that dictatorships are largely motivated by the oppressors' fears, Sharp's analyses of political regimes seem to be his greatest weapon. "In the past, with the Nazi dictatorship and with atomic weapons used on Japan, we've had the feeling that people are powerless and at the mercy of these horrible regimes and the horrors of the world," he reflected. "But there have been plenty of people who have also resisted. And there has been an extension of that in the past few years in North Africa and other places. This type of struggle is coming of age in terms of its recognition and that's very important for people pondering how to deal with the problems that remain." Those problems, in Sharp's view, include continued dictatorships, coup d'états, terrorism, and a feeling of helplessness among people. A list of tools Yulia Tymoshenko was a driving force of the Orange Revolution Sharp's premise for non-violent revolution is brilliant in its simplicity: without the support of its people, no regime can survive. Take it away, and the whole structure collapses. His methods to that end are equally simple and powerful. In his "198 Methods of Nonviolent Action," he lists "displays of flags and symbolic colors" as one of many tools for toppling a regime. During the 2004 Orange Revolution in Ukraine, protesters transformed city squares into seas of orange flags and clothing. The effect was striking. Other tools on Sharp's list: slogans, caricatures and symbols, prayer, worship and singing. In Cairo last year, protesters during the Egyptian Revolution assembled for Friday prayers followed by mass political rallies. They lived in tents on Tahrir Square, singing and making art all along the way. Sharp's visions have prompted everything from accusations that he was working for the CIA to the British documentary "How to Start a Revolution," released last September, in which the scholar plays the leading role. Still, Sharp forges on, continuing to publish works such as "Waging Nonviolent Struggle: 20th Century Practice and 21st Century Potential" with Joshua Paulson in 2005, and "Sharp's Dictionary of Power and Struggle" in 2011. The academics of pacifism Sharp suggest flags, color and music can bring about change, as here in Morocco Sharp, who is professor emeritus of political science at the University of Massachusetts in Dartmouth, founded the non-profit Albert Einstein Institution in Boston in 1983, an organization devoted to the study and strategic use of non-violent action in conflict situations around the world. He studied at Ohio State University and received a Doctor of Philosophy from Oxford University in 1968, before holding research posts at Harvard University's Center for International Affairs. Born in North Baltimore, Ohio in 1928 as the son of a Protestant minister, Sharp has been nominated for the Nobel Peace Prize twice. But looking back at his life, Sharp said there was no key moment that inspired his study of non-violent revolution. "It was more a series of realizations about the state of the world and of all of the puzzle pieces," he said. "The struggle of non-violent revolution is not new, however. It draws on the very nature of human beings. People are capable of being stubborn and a bit difficult, and governments have trouble with this." Sharp demonstrated such an attitude, which landed him nine months in jail when he protested against conscription for the Korean War. Filling in the gaps Although as an American he was not directly affected by the Nazi dictatorship in Europe, it was that dictatorship which shaped Sharp's thinking and his belief in people power. He read of examples of non-violent struggle which had achieved something even then, and he became convinced that this was the way forward. Thousands of protesters gathered at Cairo's Tahrir Square last year Despite the more violent protests across the Arab world of late, Sharp believes that, in the long term, insightful reflection on political mechanisms combined with non-violent protests will gain the upper hand in a conflict - after all, he says, violence is the enemy's best weapon. "If you really want to accomplish your objective, you have to think about how to do it, and do it skillfully," he said. "This is a new realization of what human beings are capable of: that we can use our minds now to find our way out of these difficulties."


Egyptians launch historic and divisive presidential vote Egyptians are heading to the polls this weekend in a historic vote for a new president. The choices, however, are forcing voters to choose between two extremes. For the first time ever, ordinary Egyptians are voting for their next president, a year after autocrat President Hosni Mubarak was deposed. To the frustration of many, though, the choice is between a military man who served under Mubarak and an Islamist. "Both are useless, but we must choose one of them, unfortunately." said Hassan el-Shafie, 33, in Mansoura, north of Cairo. The contenders His rival, Mohammed Morsi of the Muslim Brotherhood, however, portrays himself as a revolutionary. He has failed to win broader support, but there have been no reliable opinion polls to predict the results. The election stems from the Arab Spring pro-democracy protests that brought down Mubarak, but the vote itself may lead to more turbulence. The army, for example, is unlikely to fully trust an Islamist president, and a Mubarak ally runs the risk of riling the revolutionaries. Future is unclear Some in Egypt have begun to wonder whether the generals who pushed aside Mubarak last year to appease the protesters will honor the plan to relinquish power by July 1 to the winner. On Thursday, the country's Supreme Constitutional Court ruled certain articles in the law governing parliamentary elections to be invalid, thus forcing the Islamist-dominated legislature to be dissolved. Add to that the lack of a new constitution, and it is easy to see why many are wondering what Egypt's governance will look like in the near future. Some revolutionary supporters and activists are advocating abstention as a form of protest. They believe the Supreme Council of the Armed Forces (SCAF), which took power when Mubarak was ousted, is propping up their perceived candidate, Shafiq, in the hopes of a counter-revolution. They also fear that the court's decisions have given too much legislative power to the SCAF. An election official told the Reuters news agency that voting on Saturday had been steady. The election is to conclude Sunday evening, and a result is hoped for within a few hours of the polls closing. Whoever wins, Egypt's new president will take to the job with a struggling economy, questionable security and the challenge of uniting a divided nation. He will do so without a constitution or parliament in place. tm/pfd (Reuters, AFP)


Opinion: Egyptian protesters deserve our unreserved support After the revolution in Tunisia, the Egyptian people are challenging their authoritarian ruler. Rainer Sollich of DW's Arab Service says that the democratic forces in the region deserve Europe and America's solidarity. It took the Egyptian people three decades to rise up against authoritarian President Hosni Mubarak. Those three decades were defined by restricted freedom and brutal repression, by corruption, human rights abuses, and a growing rage over social injustice. But now Egyptians are on the streets - they have been for days. And the images from Cairo and Alexandria are just like those from Tunisia: the people are demanding the resignation of their unloved ruler. They will neither be consoled with empty promises nor intimidated by the government. They are risking their lives by defying state power. They are brave. Und what are we risking? Considerably less. For three decades we have mostly looked away. At best, we protested quietly when our values were trampled by the West's partners. In Europe, the debate now revolves around a possible domino effect and its consequences. Tunisia's ruler has already fallen. If the heavyweight Mubarak falls, will the entire region descend into chaos? Does Europe now face an unstable Middle East wavering on the verge of an Islamist coup? Will Israel face a heightened threat scenario? Rainer Sollich is the head of Deutsche Welle's Arab Service Nobody can rule that out. The dynamic of the protest wave, which has engulfed a growing number of Arab states, is difficult to predict and its end remains undecided. It could unfold differently from country to country. But the development toward more freedom, justice and democracy is possible everywhere. Democracy has just as many supporters in Egypt as it does in Tunisia and other countries. The call for freedom strikes a chord with people from all walks of life: the urban middle class, the young Facebook generation as well as conservative Muslims and Christians. These are the groups that the US and the EU need to clearly support. For far too long, we have given the impression that oppression and injustice in the Arab world only interests us when it concerns anti-Western regimes, prominent democracy activists, or minorities like Christians. It is a positive sign that western politicians, under the duress of current events, are starting to rethink their positions. Unfortunately very late, but hopefully not too late. Every sign of palling around with authoritarian rulers damages our reputation in the region - and in the consciousness of an entire generation. Maybe politicians have to play by the diplomatic rules of the game. But a politically conscious citizen does not: I declare my solidarity with the democratic forces in Egypt and the entire region. Lest we betray our values, the protesters deserve our unreserved support. Author: Rainer Sollich/ sk Editor: Rob Mudge


Egyptians set to face clear choice in presidential runoff Partial results from the first round of Egypt's presidential election indicate that in the runoff, voters will have to choose between a member of the former Mubarak regime and the Muslim Brotherhood's candidate. Partial results from the first round of Egypt's presidential election suggest that voters will be facing a clear choice when the go to the polls to cast their ballots in a runoff next month. With most of the votes counted from the first round of the polls held on Wednesday and Thursday, the Muslim Brotherhood claimed that its candidate, Mohamed Mursi had finished first. However, an official from the Islamist movement said he had only taken about 25 percent of the vote, meaning Mursi would have to face the second-place candidate in the runoff. That candidate, the official said, will be Ahmed Shafiq, the last prime minister to serve under President Hosni Mubarak before he stepped down in the face of massive protests against his rule early last year. The official said Shafiq had received 23 percent of the votes. The Muslim Brotherhood said it based its claim on results it had gained access to from about 12,800 of the roughly 13,100 polling stations. Official results are not expected until Sunday. Indirect endorsement Mursi received an apparent boost to his campaign later on Friday when a rival Islamist candidate, Abdel Moneim Abol Fotouh, called on voters to “confront the corrupt regime.” While he did not directly endorse Mursi, his words clearly directed against the man who had held office under Mubarak. The Muslim Brotherhood, which was banned during the Mubarak years, now dominates Egypt's political landscape. It already holds nearly half of the seats in parliament, becoming the largest bloc after victories in elections late last year. The group has promised to fight corruption, but also to introduce Islamic sharia law to a greater extent, a prospect that has alarmed more moderate Muslims, secular Egyptians and the Christian minority, who all fear restrictions on civil liberties. The presidential elections are meant to be the last step towards restoring civilian to rule to Egypt, which has been governed by a military council since Mubarak stepped down in February 2011. pfd/sej (Reuters, AFP)


Has the Arab Facebook revolution lost steam? Are social media and the Internet as relevant today in Arab countries as they were at the height of anti-government protests? Online activists spoke out on the issue and more at the Berlin blogger conference re:publica. The "Arab Spring" in Tunisia, Egypt and elsewhere relied heavily on the Internet and social media to organize and accelerate protests against dictatorial regimes. But do the online tools play an equally important role in anchoring democracy in these countries? "The revolution has shown that the Internet can be a spark to set things in motion," Tarek Amr, an Egyptian activist said. "But to build a democracy, you need other means," he added. The passionate Egyptian blogger witnessed the toppling of President Hosni Mubarak in February last year and even contributed to the protests that led to the event. Amr was among the guests on a Deutsche Welle panel at the Berlin blogger conference re:publica. It's an international event that doesn't just draw geeks and tech fans but also invites political thinkers and activists to speak about current debates. Tunisia at tipping point? So, has the much-touted "Facebook Revolution" in the Arab World lost steam? How has the Internet changed politics and how do political developments impact what's happening online and in the media? These were some of the questions addressed by a lively discussion, hosted by DW editor Robert Mudge. It focused on the situation in Egpyt, Tunisia and Syria. The three very different countries are also witnessing a rapid change in their respective media landscapes. Claire Ulrich has been following media developments in Tunisia Claire Ulrich from the international blogger network "Global Voices" said citizen journalism enabled by social networks such as Twitter and Facebook had by no means petered out after the social upheaval and protests. Ulrich has been following events in Tunisia, especially, very closely. "The traditional media there were earlier steered from the presidential palace," Ulrich said. "Now the country has come to a tipping point - the question is what will be published in future?" Online activists to newspaper journos? Ulrich said she found it encouraging that journalism training workshops were already conducted in a few Arab cities so that young activists could get basic knowledge for their activities as "citizen journalists." They already play an important role in Tunisia. In February, the Tunisian Minister for Human Rights, Samir Dilou, triggered controversy when he said in a television interview that homosexuality was a perversion that needed to be treated medically. Citizen journalists responded with a flood of protests - first online and then on the streets. Claire Ulrich said she had huge faith in Tunisia's cyber activists. "They're still working online. But, who knows, maybe one day they'll become the new newspaper journalists in Tunisia." A funeral as a live stream A different media story is unfolding in Syria. Laila Nachawati, a Syrian blogger, said the media is still as tightly controlled as it has been in the past decades and the state media outlets often present their own version of reality. "They show a parallel world in Syria where nothing happens, where people eat ice cream on the streets," Nachawati said. "Sometimes, they show terrorist attacks but you often see that they are bad fakes because they make mistakes," the blogger said. "They let people operate in front of the camera and then you see how they stand up and go away though they've allegedly been injured. Nobody believes it anymore!" Leila Nachawati says the media's tightly controlled in Syria Laila Nachawati said the Internet showed a completely different side of Syria. An increasing number of online activists in the country risk their lives by uploading demonstrations or funerals as live streams on the web. But that poses problems too, Nachawati said. "It's really difficult to be sure which information is reliable," she said. But Nachawati pinned the blame not on citizen journalists but the government, who she said did not allow foreign journalists into the country. In Egypt too, the role played by online activists is far from losing importance, blogger Tarek Amr said. They often offer different material than the mainstream media, he added. They don't just bring stories that grab attention, are good to market or are simple to tell. "They (online activists) bring everything because their own life is at stake and they doggedly show it," Amr said. Hope and unity Apart from a no-holds-barred portrayal of events on the ground, the Internet is indispensable in Syria in bringing people together, Nachawati said. Egyptian blogger Tarek Amr on the stage at re:publica "We citizens have experienced a wave of solidarity - from country to country. That unites and welds activists together. The communication via the Internet has contributed to that," Nachawati said. "The expression 'social network' is understood literally - people who unite, who overcome political borders." Tarek Amr said the same holds true for Egypt too. "The most important thing that the Tunisians gave us in Egypt was hope," Amr said. In Tunisia, according to Claire Ulrich, the Internet has spawned life-long links - between countries and people.


US, British leaders won't dismiss possibility of bomb on Russian plane US and UK leaders have said a bomb may have brought down a Russian airliner over Egypt's Sinai Peninsula, killing all 224 aboard. Russian and Egyptian officials, however, have continued to discount the suggestion. Leaders from both the United States and Great Britain said Thursday that they were exploring the possibility that a bomb brought down a Russian airliner over Egypt's Sinai Peninsula, killing all 224 aboard. US President Barack Obama told a US radio station Thursday that a bomb could have taken down the Russian airliner, while admitting it was too early to be certain. "I think there is a possibility that there was a bomb on board, and we are taking that very seriously," he said. In London, British Prime Minister David Cameron told reporters that the destruction of the airliner could have been intentional. "We cannot be certain that the Russian airliner was brought down by a terrorist bomb, but it looks increasingly likely that that was the case," Cameron said. He made his comments as he was hosting Egyptian President Abdel-Fattah el-Sissi, whose government has avoided drawing any conclusions. The so-called "Islamic State" jihadist group has claimed responsibility for the October 31 disaster, in which the Saint Petersburg-bound jet crashed after taking off from Sharm el-Sheikh airport. Russia discounts bomb theory Russia has continued to downplay the bombing scenario, saying it was too early to draw conclusions over the fate of the Airbus A321 jet that broke up mid-air at cruising altitude of 30,000 feet about 23 minutes after takeoff. Permalink http://p.dw.com/p/1H0qe "Theories about what happened and the causes of the incident can only be pronounced by the investigation," Peskov said. Several European countries including Germany, Ireland and the Netherlands have suspended flights to and from Sharm al-Sheikh, leaving tens of thousands of tourists stranded in the Red Sea resort. Britain has said flights from Sharm el-Sheikh to London will resume on Friday but added passengers will travel only with hand luggage. "These flights will operate under special security measures mandated by the UK government," a statement from Thomson Airways said. Russian commercial flights have also continued to operate. If claims by Islamic State that it brought down the civilian airliner prove to be true, it would be a first for the militant group that controls swathes of Syria and Iraq. It would also likely devastate Egypt's tourism industry, which has been striving to recover since the Arab Spring revolution and subsequent military coup that brought el-Sissi to power in 2013. jar/sms (Reuters, AFP)


Legal challenges face Egyptian presidential candidates Several candidates intending to run in Egypt's upcoming presidential election may find their names taken off the ballot should a series of legal challenges to their candidacy be upheld. A day after Omar Suleiman officially entered the Egyptian presidential race, a lawyer has filed a legal challenge to try and get him barred from running, according to a judicial source quoted by Reuters. A court is expected to hear the case Tuesday. Suleiman is a former head of Egypt's General Intelligence service. He was also a deputy to Hosni Mubarak in the last couple of weeks before the long-time president stepped down last year in the face of mass protests against his rule. His involvement in the Mubarak regime is the reason for the case seeking to ban him from the presidential election. The case also targets Ahmed Shafiq, Mubarak's final prime minister, who is also running in the elections. Suleiman said in an interview with an Egyptian newspaper a day after announcing his candidacy that it would restore stability in Egypt, while the candidates of the Islamist Muslim Brotherhood would not have much of a chance due to a loss of popularity among Egyptians. "The practices of the Brotherhood and their monopolistic ways and unacceptable pronouncements have contributed to the change in public opinion," Suleiman said. He added that he had been receiving threats since he made the announcement to run. Islamist candidate woes In a news conference on Monday, one of the Muslim Brotherhood's candidates, Khairat El-Shater, said Suleiman represented a step back for the country after hundreds of people died in the revolution against Mubarak. "The Egyptians did not make their sacrifices just for Mubarak's vice president to make a return," he told a news conference. "If there is an attempt to steal the revolution, we will go back into the streets." Shater's candidacy has also been called into question, prompting the Muslim Brotherhood to name a backup candidate should Shater be ruled ineligible. Egypt's ruling military council issued pardons last week for a series of convictions Shater had received under Mubarak's regime, in a move that was thought to have cleared the way for his candidacy. However some legal experts say that might not be enough and an actual reversal of the verdicts would be required. The party's president, Mohammed Morsi, is the backup candidate. Another Islamist candidate, Hazem Sala Abu Ismail, is widely expected to be declared ineligible to run, after the election commission on Saturday said it had received confirmation that his mother had acquired a US passport. The election rules dictate that candidates, their spouses and their parents may hold Egyptian citizenship only. mz/pfd (AFP, Reuters, AP)


Spreading the word: Syria's digital revolution Just across the border, Syrians are doing what they can to help their countrymen fighting at home. That support is driven by the increasing use of social media which paved the way for change in Tunisia and Egypt. An oppressive regime, a brutal military and little promise of change: Unlike the Egyptian and Tunisian revolutions, the uprising in Syria has faced seemingly insurmountable odds from the very beginning. This was the revolution, analysts predicted, that would not last as President Bashar al-Assad's forces were simply too powerful. But more than 100 days after the first protests began in the streets of Daraa, the breadth and strength of the uprising stronger than as ever. And across the border in Turkey in refugee camps, Syrians wave flags, upload images of protests and try to help their countrymen while echoing the cries for change during popular Friday protests. "Syria has never had this kind of popular uprising with mass protests on the street, Radwan Ziadeh, executive director of the Syrian Center for Political and Strategic Studies in Washington DC, told Deutsche Welle.  "The Syrians right now have actually discovered the power of their voice, and the power of numbers." That power, say many protestors, is thanks in part to digital technology. As the revolutions in Tunisia and Egypt began earlier this year, Syrians, too, witnessed the images, voices and messages broadcast around the world. They carried forward the rallying cry into Syria in March, using cell phones and amateur cameras to document their own protests and inspire an ever-growing number of Syrians to join the movement. "Small committees and small groups were created in the beginning among networks of friends in the same neighborhood," said Malath Aumran, of the Local Coordination Committee, the network of Syrian activists coordinating the uprising, speaking from Beirut. "They have good communication on the ground and also they use the internet for communicating between the cities and towns." Revolution now As the uprising has swelled in number, so too has the activity on social media networks, where human rights organizations and demonstrators post daily updates and upload videos. The Facebook page, "The Syrian Revolution 2011," has amassed more than 200,000 followers, creating a forum for protestors and their supporters around the world to share the latest news and encourage protestors to continue. Youtube video uploads from Syria have exploded, showing reels of rallies, demonstrations and violence.  With no independent media reports, Syrians are using the web to show their videos of the violent protests One Syrian young man, who fled across the mountains into the Turkish town of Güvecci, brought a USB stick carrying dozens of short videos he had taken during protests in his hometown of Lazkiye. The young Syrian man, who asked that his name not be used because he is in Turkey illegally, says he is spreading those videos via the Internet and will continue to fight for freedom from Turkey. "This couldn't have happened earlier," he said of the mass protests. "Now we have cell phones and can talk to each other, and we know what is happening in other towns." In one clip, he keeps recording while he runs from a wave of bullets and advancing Syrian troops. In another, the lens focuses on a young Syrian named Mohamed, a friend, lying in a pool of blood after he was caught in the line of fire. "They have no regard for human life," said Abdul, referring to Syrian forces, who welcomed the Syrian and the other men into his home in Güvecci. Originally of Syrian descent, Abdul has lived in the Turkish town for several years. His home has become a central meeting place for a number of his families who have managed to escape safely across the border. There, they gather around the television to watch reports from Turkish television reporters and Arabic news networks. "Look at the Syrian channels, they keep showing regular shows," laughed Abdul while flipping through a series of Syrian news and information networks. "They act like nothing is going on." Sympathizers and friends in Turkish border towns have also helped, smuggling Turkish SIM cards across the border to Syrians hiding in makeshift refugee camps in the woods. Tapping into Turkish cell phone providers has allowed fleeing Syrians to send updates and messages without being tracked by authorities. Many there are planning their path to Turkey. "We know how modern Muslims live now thanks to the Internet," said the young Syrian, referring to Turkey. "And that's how we want to live." Raw images  Syrians are urging the world to take notice of their plight But more than mobilizing masses of protestors, the images and voices strewn across television and online have also served to waken Syrians from what some experts called a four-decade-long slumber: Faced with raw, unedited proof of President Assad's brutal tactics, many have been forced to take a stance, driving a deep wedge between the government's supporters and the rest. "The country is split now," said another young Syrian man who fled to Turkey. "Either you're with Assad or you're not." He said that those who are openly supporting Assad are doing it because they are afraid. "Those against him won't give in until we have freedom." Still, Syria's awakening has come at a heavy price: Human rights organizations estimate more than 1,300 people have died since the unrest began, and many more have been imprisoned. More than 12,000 Syrians now live in refugee camps on the in Turkey's Hatay province and have little prospect of leaving there, let alone returning home. While many Syrians have vowed to topple President Assad's regime, some say they, like Libyans, face a unique challenge. "What happened in Tunisia and Egypt was the leaders knew when their time was up," said Mohamed Hamadi, a 32-year-old lawyer who fled the town of Bdama with his wife and four children to Turkey where they now live in one of the five refugee camps. "Assad doesn't know that." Still, some experts believe the movement has grown too strong and the international pressure on Assad too great for protestors to back down any time soon. Already, Assad is negotiating on restrictions for non-Baath party members to participate in government, a turnaround from three months ago. "We are in the summer vacations now and the students are not at school and university, so it will extend further especially with the youth," said Wallid Saffour of the Syrian Human Rights Committee in London. "We expect that it will continue not only on Fridays but other days, morning and night, and this will have a very bad effect on the regime." Author: Sumi Somaskanda, Syrian-Turkish border Editor: Rob Mudge


Egyptians rally to hold military council to its word Cairo's Tahrir Square filled with thousands of Egyptians Friday, all protesting against the ruling military council - but for not all for the same reason. Thousands of Egyptians gathered for a protest on Friday in Cairo's Tahrir Square, demanding that interim military rulers stand by their promise to hand over power after presidential elections at the end of May. The generals in command since former President Hosni Mubarak's ouster recently disqualified 10 presidential candidates, including a front-runner representing the Muslim Brotherhood. Friday's protest, held at the site in central Cairo that was a key location for the movement that toppled Mubarak's regime, was attended by both Islamists and liberals, united in their frustration about the military junta and moves that some consider to be a threat to moving Egypt's new democracy forward. One protest, different aims But the Muslim Brotherhood, while joining liberals and youth organizations in Tahrir Square, is not necessarily after the same thing. Khairat el-Shater was rejected because of a law that stipulates that candidates linked to criminal activity in the past cannot stand in elections until they have been released or pardoned for six years; he was imprisoned last year for terrorism and money laundering. Mubarak's former spy chief Omar Suleiman and Islamic preacher Hazem Abu Ismail have also been disqualified. Suleiman was barred because of his failure to get enough endorsements from all 15 provinces, as the law demands. Abu Ismail, an ultra-conservative Salafist, was disqualified because his mother holds a foreign passport. Election rules say that the parents of candidates must be solely Egyptian citizens. Some of his supporters were on hand Friday to rally against the election's committee decision to disqualify him. Constitutional conundrum In addition to the disqualification of certain presidential candidates, the military council has indicated its desire to have a new constitution in place before the elections take place, which would be ahead of schedule. Some worry that by pushing the deadline for a new constitution forward, work on crafting it will be rushed and incomplete. A committee established in December and tasked with drawing up a new constitution was dissolved after Christian and Muslim religious figures withdrew due to complaints that the committee was dominated by political Islamists. Liberal and youth protesters on Friday called for new criteria for the committee to ensure that it was representative of all Egyptians. They also tried to rally support for a single anti-military "revolution" candidate that all factions could get behind, but the Muslim Brotherhood and other Islamists did not get on board. The Muslim Brotherhood, the best organized political organization in Egypt, is still in the race. Mohamed Mursi, who heads the group's political party, was nominated as a back-up candidate in the event of Shater's disqualification. The presidential election is scheduled to kick off with a first round of voting on May 23 and 24. Commentators expect that to lead to a run-off in June between the top two candidates. The ruling military council is scheduled to transfer power to the new president on July 1. mz/pfd (Reuters, AFP, AP)


Egyptian entrepreneur challenges attitudes to women Frustrated by the Egyptian media's portrayal of women as second-class citizens, Amani El Tunsi set up the 'Girls Only' radio station to challenge stereotypes about women. The station has now won a German prize. Creative and determined, Amani El Tunsi bubbles with energy and enthusiasm. Back in 2008, this enterprising computer science graduate hit upon the idea of launching a radio station to improve the situation of Egyptian women. Three years later, after being sacked, losing sponsorship deals, having her studio ransacked and being arrested by President Hosni Mubarak's regime, she travelled to Munich to accept the Young Leaders Award from the carmaker-sponsored BMW foundation. "This idea came to me when I found that whatever any girl in Egypt does, if she's not married, she's incomplete, she's not successful," she told Deutsche Welle. "There's pressure for girls to marry even if she doesn't find her Mr. Right. Also, the percentage of girls is higher than the percentage of boys in Egypt so you're going to be the second wife or third or you won't get married. I found that we have to discuss this." Amani El Tunsi's prize money will help her set her radio station to right Uphill struggle The 27-year-old explained that she grew tired of listening to Egyptian radio programs aimed at females because they covered trivial topics, and didn't challenge them to consider more complex subjects. "Most of them talk about how to cover your head," she said. "There's no deep talk about what you're thinking, what you feel, what you think about your future, or how to develop yourself. I wanted to put all of that into the media." But setting up a regular radio station was not an option back in 2008 due to the monopoly that Mubarak's regime held on all terrestrial broadcasting by law. "Under Mubarak the licensing controls were very strict and it was almost impossible to have independent media," Naomi Sakr, Professor of Media Policy at the University of Westminster in London, explains. "Radio on the Internet gets around the regulatory controls on independent media." Determined to make a difference True to her motto - "I will resist and won't follow the others, I can make a change" - El Tunsi set about establishing an alternative Internet radio station run by girls for girls. But her quest to challenge prevailing prejudices in Egypt was beset with difficulties - first, she was unable to find funding, then she was fired from her job as an art director for engaging in her own entrepreneurial activity. Undeterred, El Tunsi took out a private loan before securing advertising contracts with multinational brands like Pepsi and Coca-Cola, proof of the success of her station. When these sources of funding abandoned the station in the wake of the global financial crisis, El Tunsi set up a publishing house in 2009 to fund what had become known as "Girls Only." "The money is a very big challenge," she said. "The money benefits are zero because it's a non-profit organization. But as the number of subscribers increases, I feel that I'm doing the right thing." Girls Only radio became an immediate hit. Its website clocked up some 15,000 visits within the first week of broadcasting, without advertising. Visitor numbers have soared since then and El Tunsi now has a database of six million subscribers. Motivated by the plight of Egyptian women, she now broadcasts four hours of programs from a small studio in Cairo every day. "I have to do something to put women in a stable situation and improve the mentality," she explained. "They have to know that they are a strong part of this community. They have to have their own personalities and know how to defend themselves."  El Tunsi took part in the demonstrations at Tahrir Square earlier this year  Run-in with national security The fledgling radio station now boasts a spectrum of some 25 programs, all of which target young, well-educated females in the Arab world. El Tunsi said she hoped her listeners would one day pass the new ideas they hear in her broadcasts on to their children and so ultimately change attitudes towards women in Egypt. But it wasn't easy. After setting up Girls Only, El Tunsi was contacted by Egypt's national security service and told to steer clear of discussing politics, religion and sex if she wanted to continue broadcasting. She was, however, able to shed some of these shackles in the wake of the 2011 Egyptian revolution. Now her listeners can tune in to programs like "After That," a talk show which acts as a platform to discuss Egypt's post-revolution future. "Now, after January 25, I talk about everything," she explained. "Everything is free, we talk about political awareness, we talk about religious things. Every day we have a new situation - we talk about money and marriage, things like that." Like many of her compatriots, El Tunsi took to the streets to depose Mubarak. She sent her subscribers messages encouraging them to venture out into Tahrir Square, the uprising's iconic epicenter, and see the revolution with their own eyes. New beginnings But her messages also came to the attention of Egypt's national security service. El Tunsi was arrested and forced to stand in a small room without a window for six hours. She apologized to the national security guard and came to a deal with him to be let go, which involved handing over her Facebook password.  'Girls Only' is run by women for women  "He changed my profile picture to a Hosni Mubarak picture and my status to 'I'm so sorry, I love you my president,' " she recalled. "All of my friends said 'What?' It was like a betrayal." When El Tunsi was arrested, her studio was raided and stripped of everything, from its mixing boards to its chairs. But her fortune took a turn for the better in May, when she was presented with the BMW award, worth 10,000 euros ($14,000). "When I got a prize it was like a dream and now it's come true," she said, breaking into a broad smile. "It means a lot to me because it gave me a chance to restart my work after the revolution. They gave me a new chance to start my life - because the radio is my life." Stefan Quandt, a member of the prize jury, praised the "practical, true-to-life approach that the radio station takes in addressing listeners," and said the jury acknowledged "the courage and the persistence that it took to found Girls Only in an unfree society." El Tunsi says she is now working to ensure that women get a prominent role to play in post-revolution Egyptian society and hopes to expand Girls Only into the Middle East. Author: Michelle Martin Editor: Ben Knight


Life in jail for Mubarak, but acquittal for most Hosni Mubarak, Egypt's former president, was sentenced to life behind bars. But many revolutionaries view the verdict as a slap in the face. The policemen who killed protesters were acquitted. Hosni Mubarak initially showed little emotion upon hearing the verdict Protesters had hoped for a death sentence for Mubarak Mubarak and his two sons also faced corruption charges, for which they were not pronounced guilty on the grounds that the charges fell under the statute of limitations.  Mubarak's followers were upset with the outcome as well. They include Kariman el-Sherif, a woman waiting for the verdict with a Mubarak amulet around her neck and a sign bearing the former president's image. She still refers to him as the president of Egypt, sometimes even as a father.  "Our country will go downhill without the president," she said. "The verdict cannot be just."  Tears from Mubarak Ahmed Shafik hopes to profit from the verdict against Mubarak


Germany commends Arab revolutions, pledges aid to promote democracy Berlin has been vocal in welcoming revolution in the Arab world. German leaders have compared the Egyptian president's ouster to the fall of the Iron Curtain and have pledged new aid to promote democracy in Tunisia. The German government has welcomed the revolutions in Tunisia and Egypt, pledging Saturday to do its part in establishing democratic rule in the two countries. German Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle said Saturday during his visit to Tunisia that the country's democratic revolution was "irreversible." If Tunisia succeeds in democratizing, it would become "an example to other countries in the Arab world," added Westerwelle, who pledged additional aid money from Germany. Westerwelle told Trifi Germany would provide its know-how to help with Tunisia's elections Westerwelle arrived in Tunis earlier on Saturday, where the Foreign Ministry said he was to meet with interim Prime Minister Mohamed Ghannouchi and heads of various commissions tasked with implementing political reform and investigating the corruption of the past regime. "The aim of Minister Westerwelle's visit is to give a clear signal that Germany and Europe are ready to assist Tunisia in this ongoing period of transformation," Germany's Foreign Ministry said. Aid to Tunisia Tunisian League of Human Rights President Mokhtar Trifi told reporters on Saturday that Westerwelle had offered Germany's expertise and logistical assistance to ensure democratic elections in Tunisia. Westerwelle has called on the international community not to be distracted from Tunisia's needs by recent events in Egypt, where embattled President Hosni Mubarak stepped down on Friday after 18 days of sustained protests. Berlin has pledged 3 million euros ($4 million) to Tunisia as a "democracy promotion fund," as well as 500,000 euros to create student-exchange scholarships. Westerwelle urged other countries to join Germany in supporting Tunisia, which in January spurred pro-democratic public protests across the Arab world with a grassroots movement that led to the ouster of President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali. Merkel praises protests  Even Egyptians living in Berlin took to the streets to celebrate Mubarak's departure  Meanwhile, German Chancellor Angela Merkel said on Saturday that leaders in the Arab world should get accustomed to demands from their citizens for basic human rights. In her weekly video podcast, Merkel said recent protests in Arab capitals reminded her of those which "overthrew the dictatorships of eastern Europe" two decades ago. In the podcast, which was recorded before Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak stepped down Friday, Merkel said protestors in Tunis and Cairo had echoed the demands for freedom of those who brought down the Iron Curtain. "The people are rising up, not just in Europe but in other parts of the world, too," said the chancellor, who was raised in former communist East Germany. According to Merkel, the protests showed that "the people will no longer allow themselves to be stopped from speaking." Merkel added that it was up to Arabs to determine the reforms they wanted, but that respect for basic human rights such as freedom of expression was a must and "that begins with ensuring that the dignity of every single human is sacrosanct." Building democracy Additionally, Merkel said the shift in the Arab world created new challenges for Europe, which would be working more closely with the transitioning countries. "I believe that's our responsibility because there can only be peace and security for us when everyone on earth has the opportunity for a good life," she said.  Many protesters in Cairo say they would stay put until all their demands for reform are answered  On Friday, at the news of Mubarak's ouster, Merkel told reporters that she "rejoiced" together with the Egyptian people. "I call on those who now bear the responsibility and will bear the responsibility to make the developments in Egypt irreversible," she said in Berlin, where hundreds of Egyptians had gathered to celebrate the succeeded revolution in front of the city's Brandenburg Gate. Author: David Levitz (AFP, AP, dpa) Editor: Sean Sinico


Egyptian judges say NGOs had political motives An investigation into illegal funding for NGOs operating in Egypt has yielded claims that the foreign groups had political motives, according to a judge in the case. Judges in Egypt investigating non-government organizations accused of receiving illegal foreign funding said the groups were illegally involved in Egyptian politics. At a press conference on Wednesday, Judge Sameh Abu Zeid said the NGOs were operating "without license" and their activity constituted "pure political activity and [had] nothing to do with civil society work." In December, raids were conducted on the offices of 17 local and foreign NGOs to investigate how they were funded. Abu Zeid said on Wednesday that the raids were conducted "according to the law." In investigating the illegal funding charges, Egyptian authorities apparently learned that the NGOs changed tact after the January 25 revolution of last year that knocked President Hosni Mubarak from power. "The activities became political, related to training political parties or mobilizing people," Abu Zeid said. Among the groups implicated in the investigation are Germany's Konrad Adenauer Foundation and a number of US organizations. Nineteen American workers face criminal charges. The Pentagon said Wednesday that the US chairmen of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Gen. Martin Dempsey, would visit Egypt this week for security talks with his Egyptian counterpart. A spokesman for Dempsey said he wasn't being dispatched specifically because of the NGO investigation but that if the issue was not resolved by then, it would be brought up in talks. mz/ccp (AFP, AP)


Arab uprisings have Palestinians knocking on Israel's door For months now, demonstrations and uprisings have been rocking the political scene in the Arab world. But in Israel, the reaction to the demands for democracy and freedom has been ambivalent. In Jerusalem, the fall of Egypt's Hosni Mubarak was met with regret. The Israeli state fears that the revolutionary movement in Egypt and elsewhere in the Arab world could spread to Palestinians in the occupied territories. And its true - Palestinians in refugee camps in the Middle East have become louder and more strident in demanding their rights to a homeland and political self-determination. On June 5, a high point was reached: Groups of people from Syria marched on the Israeli occupied Golan Heights. They waved Palestinian flags, shouted slogans, and - time and time again - they tried to climb over barricades. From behind their border fortifications, Israeli security forces shot tear gas, then rubber bullets, at the demonstrators. Finally they broke out more serious ammunition - real bullets. The Syrian media reported that more than 20 Syrian Palestinians were killed that day. Sending a signal Defending Israel's position, regime spokesman Mark Regev spoke indignantly on Arab television station Al Jazeera. "It's clear this was a provocation. I don't know how you can call it anything else, quite frankly," Regev said. "You're saying we shouldn't be here - you can have your political opinion. But you don't have the right, by violence, to try to come in and attack our border guards and break into our territory. Would any country stand for that?"  Palestinians marked the anniversary of the Six-Day-War with a massive demonstration  But the Palestinian demonstrators in the Golan say their protest action was sending a signal, and that they are no longer ready to accept political stagnation. They are demanding their rights, as guaranteed by the United Nations, to return to the homeland that their parents and grandparents were displaced from in 1948. The latest Palestinian protests are being fed by the larger resistance movement in the Arab world. In Tunisia and Egypt, but also in Yemen, Syria, Bahrain and Libya, people are demanding to be part of the political system; calling for social equality, freedom and honor. The Palestinians have latched energetically on to these demands. Opportunity - or threat? For the first time on Nakba Day, the anniversary of the founding of Israel, which markes the beginning of the Palestinian "catastrophe," Palestinians marched from refugee camps in Lebanon and Syria, toward Israel. "The Arab Revolution is beating on Israel's door," Tel Aviv based newspaper Haaretz wrote on that day. For Israelis, however, the Arab Revolutions represent a threat. They fear a rise of extremism, and they fear the political group the Muslim Brotherhood. That is why Jerusalem backed Hosni Mubarack right up to the end - in Israel, the onetime Egyptian president was considered to be the person who kept watch over the peace accord between both countries, and a guarantor of stability in the south. In the north, Israel felt it could count on Syrian leader Bashar al Assad. As the successor of his father, Hafez al Assad, he maintained the status quo and made sure that the armistice border on the Golan Heights stayed quiet. Now for the first time in years, demonstrators have broken this peace - with the authorization of the government in Damascus, notes Eli Podeh, a historian and Middle East expert at the University of Tel Aviv. 'Syria is creating a diversion' "The Syrian regime has a clear intersest in throwing flames onto the fire," Podeh said. "Doubtless, the revolutions in the Arab World have led to mass demonstrations. But in this specific case it is more about the Syrian regime trying to divert attention from what is happening elsewhere in Syria." The mass demonstrations that led to the fall of dictatorships in Tunisia and Egypt, and which are shaking Syria's regime badly, have yet to reach Ramallah and Gaza. Up to now, there have been only small demonstrations, mostly of young people, in the Palestinian cities. And the Palestinian National Authority and the Hamas government quickly put an end to them. But while it is still quiet on the Palestinian streets, historian Poden said that could change. "We have to realize that the opposition there won't be against the regime of Mahmoud Abbas or Hamas, but against the occupation," he told Israeli television. "And when that happens, the Palestinians will take to the streets en masse. Mass demonstrations are the result of frustration and disappointment. In the Arab world this frustration and disappointment is aimed at the regime. But for the Palestinians, it is aimed against the occupiers. It will bring them to the streets." What can Israel do about it? The historian recommends the country begin a political process designed to meet the Palestinians somewhere in the middle, and avoid the outbreak of a third Intifada. Author: Bettina Marx (jen) Editor: Rob Mudge


In Egypt, fearing the worst The Egyptian authorities are increasingly cracking down on activists and students. Hundreds have been detained in recent months and dozens disappeared. Naomi Conrad reports from Cairo. When Esraa disappeared without a trace, Duaa Mahfouz El-Taweel said she immediately knew what to do: The next day, she ripped off all the photos decorating her elder sister's bedroom walls. Three weeks later, Duaa, a softly-spoken 22 year-old student, reached for her mobile phone and scrolled through her pictures. She pointed to a grainy, slightly skewed shot showing several colorful collages of her sister smiling into the camera, laughing and hugging friends. Today, only a few shreds of blue-tack remain stuck to the walls. Sitting on her sister's bed in a small flat in a lower class neighborhood in Cairo, the many cuddly toys Esraa loved so much lined up neatly beside her, Duaa shrugged. "Everyone knows you have to do that." It was, she said, the normal thing to do once a relative or friend went missing: "We try to hide as much stuff as possible that tells you what kind of a person this really is." Otherwise, she added matter-of-factly, the intelligence services might decide to abduct anyone else shown in the photos. Three of her close friends and about a dozen of her acquaintances had been detained in recent months and she was taking no risks. Disappearance and detention "systematic tool" In Egypt today, abductions and disappearances are becoming common place, human rights activists say. Leaning on a slightly grimy desk in his office in Garden City, a leafy neighborhood in central Cairo, Mukhtar Muneer explained, his voice sounding weary, that they had become the regime's a "systematic tool", employed by the government of former career army officer turned President Abdel Fatah al-Sisi to intimidate any who might oppose it. Esraa's family is afraid for her safety "The period we're living through is just like the period Argentina lived", he said, referring to the former junta's practice of "disappearing" activists during the country's military rule. The 24-year old lawyer, dapper in a stylish brown suite and checkered shirt, a cigarette in his hand, sighed: He was convinced, he said, that the regime had compiled a blacklist of activists, including those active in the 2011 revolution, members of the Muslim Brotherhood, even independent-thinking journalists. It was clear, he said, in "the way they arrest and detain people, especially the very well-known political figures. That shows you that they're working according to a strategy." The point, Muneer, who works for the human rights association AFTE (Association for Freedom and Thought) said, was to intimidate people and ensure that they stayed away from any kind of political activism. Most of the students and activists, he said, were detained on fabricated charges, often of belonging to the Muslim Brotherhood of former President Mohamed Morsi, which the current regime recently designated a terrorist organization. Was anyone safe? He shrugged: "Yes. Those who are already dead." Hundreds detained It is unclear how many activists and students have been arrested in recent months. According to figures compiled by the Egyptian NGO Freedom for the Brave, at least 600 students have been detained since last October and some 163 people have disappeared since early May of this year, compared to some 260 who have disappeared since August 2013. While some have been released, many still languish in prison. This comes at a time when hundreds of supporters of the Muslim Brotherhood have been sentenced to death in mass trials in recent months. DW was unable to independently verify these numbers, given that there are no official government figures. In an interview with AFP last week, an official from the interior ministry was quoted as dismissing allegations of state-sponsored disappearances as "baseless and false". But other human rights activists DW interviewed agree that they are on the rise and that activists are increasingly picked up from their homes in the middle of the night. Some point to the two-year anniversary of former President Morsi's deposal in early July, which could spark anti-regime protests, others to a general climate of impunity. They all agree that detainees, many arrested under fabricated charges, stand little chance of a fair trial in Egypt's notoriously corrupt legal system. Muneer: "Like Argentina during the junta" Mother: "I never imagined I would see her in prison" Esraa's lawyer, Halem Henish, whom DW met in a cluttered office near Tahrir Square frequented by a motley group of anti-regime activists, was convinced that his client only reappeared 17 days after her disappearance, because her family mounted a successful social media campaign, which was picked up by many media outlets. The media attention, Henish said matter-of-factly, probably also prevented her from being tortured and mistreated in jail. Others are less fortunate: It took a month to find Ahmed Ghonim, a student of Arabic and religion at Cairo University who was picked up by security forces in early May, according to his father Mustafa whom DW reached by phone. Ahmed, whose younger brother was also abducted this year, is likely to stand trial in a military court on charges of espionage and being a member of the Muslim Brotherhood. Ahmad, his father conceded, had acted as spokesman for the Anti-Coup Alliance, an outlawed coalition of various Islamist parties formed after the deposal of Morsi. Ahmad was taken, his father said, "because he was against those in power." It's still unclear why Esraa was picked off the street by police in early June. Her family described the 23-year old as a warm-hearted, bubbly free-lance photographer who dreamed of traveling around Europe. By all accounts she had given up on political activism after she was shot and badly injured while covering protests in January of 2014. Esraa's family emphatically denied that she was ever a member or even supporter of the Muslim Brotherhood, but concede that some of her friends may be sympathizers. Sitting on her daughter's bed, her mother Hanaa shook her head in disbelief: "I never ever imagined that I would see her in prison one day. I never thought she would wear white other than on her wedding day", she said, referring to the uniform of Egypt's prisoners. But, she added, she wouldn't give up until her daughter had been released. Beside her, her younger daughter Duaa piped up: "Or until all of us have been arrested."


Uprisings in East Germany and Egypt show parallels Those who are old enough to remember the 1989 uprising that brought down the communist regime of the former East Germany have been watching events in Egypt with particular interest. A number of parallels can be drawn. The events that have been unfolding in Egypt over the past few days, have caused many in Germany to harken back to the fall of 1989, when in Leipzig and other East German cities, hundreds of thousands took to the street in demonstrations to demand political reforms. Now, similar demands are being made by Egyptians who have gathered in Cairo's Tahrir Square. But the similarities between the uprisings in East Germany in 1989 and those in Egypt, Yemen, Tunisia and other Arab states are deeper than may be immediately apparent. The revolution that occurred in the German Democratic Republic in 1989 followed significant changes in several other communist countries. The then Soviet leader, Mikhail Gorbachev, had already introduced the concepts of Glasnost (openness) and Perestroika (restructuring). There had also been reforms in Poland, and Hungary had opened its border with Austria. Later, there were reforms in Czechoslovakia and Romania too. At the time, some described it as a bush fire sweeping through Eastern Europe, which for decades had been contained behind what was known as the "iron curtain," which separated it from the West. These days, the uprisings in the Arab World are being described as an "infection," but what is meant is essentially the same. Election fraud There are also similarities in the causes of the revolution in East Germany and the uprising in Egypt. In both cases, mass election fraud helped spark the unrest. Egon Krenz went on to become East Germany's last communist leader In East Germany, it all began with the municipal elections of May 7, 1989. Following the vote, the head of East Germany's central electoral commission, Egon Krenz, announced that candidates from the ruling communist party, the SED, had received 98.85 percent of the votes. However, election observers from the opposition obtained evidence that showed that this was clearly a lie - a high number of East Germans had actually refused to vote for the SED candidates. They passed this information on to reporters from West Germany. After this information was broadcast back across the border to East Germany, the first, small demonstration was held against the election results. In Egypt, the dissent really started when the two main opposition groups boycotted the second round of voting in last fall's parliamentary elections, alleging widespread fraud in the first round in which the ruling NDP won 209 of 221 seats. A commitment to peaceful protests The young Germans who took to the streets in 1989 and the Egyptians who have been demonstrating against President Hosni Mubarak in the past few days also have some other things in common; their courage, their determination, and their commitment to demonstrate peacefully. This commitment, however, is being put to the test by counter-demonstrators - Mubarak supporters who have at times physically attacked anti-Mubarak protesters. In both East Germany and Egypt, the military found itself with a key role to play. In 1989 the tanks stayed off the streets, on orders that actually came from Moscow. In Cairo the military has also exercised restraint. No more 'big brother' Another parallel has to do with the support of the most important ally.  Mikhail Gorbachev's reforms made the 1989 revolutions possible In 1988 Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev revoked the Brezhnev Doctrine, which Moscow could use to justify military intervention in any Eastern bloc state to defend its "socialist gains." For the eastern bloc states this meant on the one hand that they became more independent, but on the other hand, the communist regimes lost the protection of their "big brother" in Moscow. Meanwhile Egypt had, until now, enjoyed the support of the United States, as Washington had long seen Mubarak as a stabilizing force in the Middle East. But there are also differences between the uprisings in the former East Germany and in Egypt or other Arab states. In 1989 the demonstrators achieved their goals relatively quickly. There were few reported cases of attacks by thugs from state security forces. The East German regime was by that time in such a sorry state that it was no longer capable of effectively resisting the impending change. At the same time, the demands that the protesters made in East Germany just shortly after the Wall came down were far more radical than those being made in Egypt today: The East Germans demanded that their very state be done away with, while all the Egyptian demonstrators are trying to get rid of are the president and his regime. An uncertain future In 1989 it was unclear what the future would hold for the Soviet Union. Many were particularly concerned about what would happen if the communist leadership of the then superpower went the way of their counterparts in East Germany, Hungary, Poland, Czechoslovakia or Romania. In 2011, the world is looking on with similar concerns about countries in Egypt's neighbourhood: Iran, Lebanon and the Palestinian territories. And right in the middle of all that is Israel, the Middle East's only democracy. Author: Matthias von Hellfeldt / pfd Editor: Rob Mudge


Germany condemns Iran crackdown Germany has denounced the violent crackdown on opposition protesters in Iran, calling it "unacceptable." Berlin has urged the regime to allow the right of free expression as new clashes erupted on Wednesday. The German government has condemned the Iranian regime for its crackdown on opposition protesters, calling it "especially worrying and disturbing." "We call upon the Iranian government not to deny the Iranian people the very rights and freedoms to which they just congratulated the Egyptian people for exercising," said a spokesman for Chancellor Angela Merkel. This comes after anti-government protesters and regime supporters clashed on Wednesday at the funeral of a man killed in Monday's protests. The violence erupted after regime backers, including parliamentarians and members of the Revolutionary Guard, held a demonstration marking the death of Sane'e Zhale, who they say was a member of the Islamist Basji militia. However, opposition supporters maintain he came from their ranks. State TV said the pro-government demonstrators chanted "Death to America, Death to Israel, Death to Mousavi and Karroubi," a reference to Iran's main opposition leaders. The regime has called a rally in Tehran for Friday to express "hatred" against the opposition. Merkel's spokesman Steffen Seibert added that Germany was offering its full support for the protesters. "The chancellor assures the Iranian women and men who courageously have taken to the streets that their calls for freedom and human rights will be heard in Germany and Europe," Seibert said. US and EU show support US President Barack Obama also offered encouragement to protesters in Iran, saying he hoped they would have the "courage" to continue expressing their "yearning for greater freedoms." He had harsh words for the Iranian regime, saying that unlike in Egypt, Iran's response to protests has been "to shoot people, beat people and arrest people." He called on US allies in the Middle East to accept that fundamental changes were taking place. "You can't be behind the curve," Obama said, as the people cry out for change. The office of EU foreign policy chief Catherine Ashton said she was taking note of events in Iran, in particular "the apparent restrictions placed on the freedom of movement of certain members of the opposition." She called on the Iranian authorities "to fully respect and protect the rights of their citizens, including freedom of expression and the right to assemble peacefully." Green Revolution revisited Two people were reportedly shot dead in Monday's clashes between protesters and riot police at Tehran's Azadi [Freedom] Square. Anti-government protesters had gathered there in support of the recent Arab uprisings and chanted "Death to Dictators." The slogan was used by demonstrators against President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad in the 2009 protests following his controversial reelection as president.  Mousavi spearheaded Iran's Green Revolution Despite a heavy police deployment and a government ban, thousands of opposition supporters took to the streets. Authorities placed opposition leader Mir Hossein Mousavi under house arrest to prevent him from taking part in the Tehran rally and also cut telephone lines and blocked Internet access. Analysts say the Iranian leadership is trying to stop opposition groups from using the uprising in Egypt to revive the kind of protests that culminated in the so-called Green Revolution in 2009. Dozens of demonstrators were killed in the 2009 rallies while a number of leading activists, pro-reform politicians and journalists were put in prison. Two dead in Yemen protests Protests have also flared up again in Yemen, where thousands of policemen have been deployed to the capital Sanaa and the southern port city of Aden to quell days of unrest between anti-regime protesters and supporters of President Ali Abdullah Saleh. Medical sources said at least one protester was shot dead by police in Aden, another was believed to have died of his wounds in hospital while 15 others were injured. Although Saleh has made a number of concessions, including a pledge to step down when his term expires in 2013, protesters are demanding his immediate ouster. Author: Rob Mudge (AP, AFP, Reuters, dpa) Editor: Sabina Casagrande


Monarchies band together in the wake of Arab Spring The democratic revolutions in the Arab world and Northern Africa have recalibrated alliances in the region. So who is cozying up to whom, and can new ties help conservative states to survive the upheaval? More or less lost among all the headlines generated by the Arab Spring was the news last May that Jordan and Morocco were being invited to join the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC), a political and economic union that includes Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates. In one sense the offer was bizarre since neither Jordan nor Morocco border on the Persian Gulf, as the existing member states do. Morocco is indeed some 5,000 kilometers (3,100 miles) away. That's a bit like Brussels asking Thailand to join the EU. But the offer to join forces was less about economics than stability. Like the GCC states, Jordan and Morocco are both monarchies, and the two nations' ruling families are popular enough among their subjects to have avoided the mass uprisings that toppled rulers in Egypt, Tunisia and Libya. In general, monarchies have proven more resilient than other forms of state in the region. Among the eight states ruled by royal families in the Arab World and North Africa, only Bahrain has been hit with serious popular rebellion. Indeed, monarchism seems to have won the unofficial competition with the other most prevalent form of state in the region, charismatic dictatorship. Masses of people in Tunisia and Libya rose up against their respective despotic rulers, and despite brutal repression of protestors, a change of power may be on the way in Yemen and Syria as well. "It's difficult to say how long the Syrian regime can survive," Sadik Al-Azm, Syrian philosopher and fellow at the Käte Hamburger Institute at the University of Bonn, told Deutsche Welle. "In a certain respect, it's already done in. The system of [Syrian President Bashar] Assad can no longer turn back the clocks after everything that's happened." Dictatorships in the guise of "republics," such as the Assad regime or Gadhafi's in Libya, arose in the 1950s and 1960s under the influence of the Cold War. Now, 20 years after the fall of the Berlin Wall, many in the region think they are hopelessly obsolete. But can Saudi-style monarchism really be an alternative for the future? Mutual support The downfall of Mubarak, left, has shaken up the region Another factor prompting new alliances is the fact that the Arab Spring has, at least temporarily, dissolved old ones. When Egyptians overthrew their long-time president Hosni Mubarak earlier this year, Saudi Arabia lost a crucial partner. Egypt is not only the most populous country in the region. It was also a pro-Western, Sunni nation that helped Saudi Arabia offset the influence of Saddam Hussein's Iraq and the pro-Iran fraction that includes Syria, Hezbollah in Lebanon and the Hamas movement in the Palestinian territories. It remains unclear which political direction post-Mubarak Egypt will take. So it's hardly surprising that Saudi Arabia, which as the home of holy sites like Mecca claims a leading role in the Islamic world, is looking for new allies. The GCC is a logical instrument for trying to secure more influence, especially as it was aimed from its very inception in 1981 as a hedge against Shiite Iran and the various charismatic dictatorships with their communist backgrounds. And with the Arab Spring revolutions reshuffling the political deck in the region, the GCC as a whole, and particularly member states like Saudi Arabia or Qatar, have been growing in international importance. Saudi ambitions Women still aren't officially allowed to drive in Saudi Arabia After the fall of Mubarak, the Saudi ruling family took steps to shore up their own position domestically. With a combination of social benefits increases, moderate reforms such as giving women limited voting rights and threats of crackdowns, the government in Riyadh has managed to hinder the sort of popular protests that have arisen elsewhere in the region. Abroad, the Saudi government sent troops to Bahrain to support that royal family against popular protests. It also used GCC subsidies to help placate unrest in Oman. Further afield, the GCC supported the ultimately successful efforts of Libyan rebels to topple Gadhafi, always something of an outsider and loner in the region. More recently, the bloc has also been trying to provide aid to Syrian dissidents, perhaps in hopes of disrupting Syria's traditional ties with Iran and ending the dominance of the Alawites, to which the Assad family belong, in favor of Sunni Syrians. The growing presence of Saudi Arabia on the international stage might give the impression that the country is aiming for the sort of regional predominance enjoyed by Egypt under Gamal Abdel Nasser in the 1950s and ‘60s. No one has been able to unite the Arab world like Nasser did But experts say the obstacles to such power are many. "Since Nasser's death [in 1970], no one power has succeeded in becoming the undisputed leader of the community of Arab states," Henner Fürtig, the director of the GIGA Institute for Near East Studies, told Deutsche Welle. "Saudi Arabia couldn't assert its dominance either. So the Saudis have to find allies." "Many Arab states are reorienting themselves," Fürtig continued. "Egypt has headed down a new political road so it's difficult for Saudi Arabia to find appropriate partners." If Egypt regains a measure of domestic stability, it is likely Cairo will claim its former influence, potentially creating conflict with its traditional ally, Saudi Arabia. And post-Saddam-Hussein Iraq remains a wildcard, with no one knowing how the multi-confessional and - ethnic country will align itself between the regional powers Saudi Arabia and Iran. What is clear is that the traditional Sunni monarchy in Saudi Arabia and the revolutionary Shiite theocracy that rules Iran will be battling it out for preeminence in the oil-rich region in general and on the Persian Gulf specifically. Author: Anne Allmeling / jc Editor: Rob Mudge


Egyptians occupy Tahrir Square to protest 'lenient' life sentence Many protesters have spent the night on Cairo's Tahrir Square. They were angered by what they see as the lenient sentencing of former President Hosni Mubarak for more than 800 deaths. Demonstrators remained in Cairo's Tahrir Square on Sunday to protest against what they see as the insufficient sentences handed down to former President Hosni Mubarak and other senior officials on Saturday. Large protests were also reported in the cities of Alexandria and Suez. The court, set up at a police academy just outside of Cairo, sentenced Mubarak and his former interior minister, Habib al-Adli, to life imprisonment for complicity in the killings of more than 800 demonstrators during the uprising that forced the long-time president to step down early last year. Mubarak and his two sons, Gamal and Alaa, were acquitted of corruption charges and several senior police officers were found not guilty of murder.   What may have angered the demonstrators the most is the fact that no single person was held responsible for the killings, which came during a violent crackdown in the early days of the 18-day uprising. However, many were also angered by the fact that the 84-year-old former leader was spared the death penalty.  The prosecutor general said on Sunday an appeal had been lodged against the verdicts. Support from Brotherhood candidate Earlier on Saturday, Morsi, who is one of two candidates in the June 16-17 presidential run-off, released a statement saying nothing less than the death penalty was acceptable punishment for Mubarak. Just before his short appearance at Tahir Square, Morsi told reporters that he fully supported the protesters. "All of us, my brothers, must realize in this period that the continuation of the revolution, and the revolutionaries' staying put in their positions in the squares, is the only guarantee to achieve the goals," he said. Opponent's offices attacked In the run-off, Morsi will face Ahmad Shafiq, the last prime minister appointed by Hosni Mubarak. Possibly sparked by renewed anger over the sentences handed down by the court, Shafiq's campaign headquarters in two provincial towns were ransacked early on Sunday. His campaign office in Cairo had already been attacked on Monday. There was no word on the state of Hosni Mubarak's health on Sunday. The man who ruled Egypt for three decades was reported to have suffered a "health crisis" as he arrived at the Cairo prison hospital where he was to serve his sentence. A report that he had suffered a heart attack could not be confirmed. pfd/ncy (dpa, DAPD, AFP, Reuters)


Anatomy of Arab revolutions shows trend toward democracy Although the Arab world has traditionally lagged behind the global trend toward greater democracy, a liberal revolution that began in Tunisia has put monarchies and dictators throughout the region on the defensive. For decades, the Arab world stagnated under authoritarianism despite a global expansion of democracy beyond its historic core in North America and Western Europe. According to the US think tank Freedom House, the number of democracies in the world more than doubled by the new millennium, as communism collapsed and strongmen from Latin America to Southeast Asia were forced from power. Although the Middle East appeared immune to this liberalizing trend, popular uprisings now referred to as the "Arab Spring" have successfully forced authoritarian regimes from power in Tunisia and Egypt, demonstrating that even political heavyweights like former Egyptian president Hosni Mubarak are ultimately accountable to the people. "We're seeing in a sense the global spread of the aspirations for democracy finally coming to the surface in the Arab world," Jack Goldstone, an expert on revolutions with George Mason University in Arlington, Virginia, told Deutsche Welle. But turning an uprising against an authoritarian leader into a broader revolution that brings true political change is more difficult. Although the regimes in Egypt and Tunisia have been successfully ousted, the future is uncertain. And in Libya, Syria and Yemen, peaceful calls for civil rights have descended into violence. "Whether this results in revolutions or not depends on the local regimes," Goldstone said. Liberal revolution According to Goldstone, there are radical revolutions and liberal revolutions. Radical revolutions mobilize peasants and workers against upper classes as in the cases of France, Russia and China, resulting in a period of extremism and violence. Liberal revolutions, however, are a nationalist mobilization of the people led by urban professionals with the aim of replacing an authoritarian ruler with a more democratic system. "They have a different pattern because instead of the violent pursuit of internal enemies and a phase of terror and radical transformation, these revolutions focused more on the political, on trying to extend some liberal rights," Goldstone said.  The uprising that began in Tunisia has spread across the Arab world Goldstone says these liberal uprisings have become increasingly common and are exemplified by the so-called color revolutions of the opening decade of the new millennium. Based on a model of peaceful civil disobedience, protesters in the "Orange Revolution" in Ukraine and the "Rose Revolution" in Georgia called for more democratic government. Goldstone believes a similar liberal model is now spreading across the Arab world after the "Jasmine Revolution" successfully toppled former president Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali in Tunisia, inspiring Egyptians to take to the streets and ultimately oust Hosni Mubarak. "We saw these two elderly out of touch dictatorships swept from power, probably surprised by the fragility and narrowness of their social base," Kristian Coates Ulrichsen, an expert on Arab politics with the London School of Economics, told Deutsche Welle. "They were just so shocked at what was happening that they just tried their old methods of repression and cracking down, and when it didn't work they had no plan B." Organizing the masses Although the protesters managed to carry out a successful uprising by focusing all of their pressure on the personalities of Ben Ali and Mubarak, Ulrichsen says the leaderless masses who took to the streets are now having trouble articulating their aims and turning their uprising into real political change - a revolution. "That's much easier isn't it - to be against something rather than for it," Ulrichsen said. "They've had trouble everywhere in defining what they're for and trying to create a coherent platform to express the demands they want." Goldstone explains the current phase of uncertainty as "competitive mobilization." The different groups who participated in the uprising are now mobilizing to compete with each other for power and leadership in the new political system. "It's a process that, unfortunately, produces some instability and weak government rather than strong and decisive government," Goldstone said. "But in a sense it's a better tradeoff, because strong and decisive government usually means a return to authoritarianism and a loss of that democratic freedom." Fragile transition This period of political uncertainty, however, carries risks. Although Ben Ali and Mubarak are gone, much of the old system still remains in place. Egypt's political transition is being administered by the Supreme Council of the Armed Forces, which has come under growing criticism for trying civilians in military courts. "It is still possible that it's only a change of personnel in the top of the regime and all the structures will remain the same," Henner Fürtig, an expert on political transformation in the Middle East with the German Institute for Global and Area Studies in Hamburg, told Deutsche Welle.  The Egyptian military is overseeing the political transition  According to Fürtig, in Egypt the old regime had three core pillars of power: Mubarak's National Democratic Party, the public sector and - most importantly - the military. "The military is still in charge," Fürtig said. "We have to wait until the elections in September and especially until the presidential elections next January. How will the military behave if a candidate will be elected who is not the real choice of the military? Then everything is open again." Butterfly effect Fürtig remains reluctant to call the upheaval in the Arab world a revolution due to the uncertainty in countries like Egypt and Tunisia. The Arab nations, however, share the same underlying problems of authoritarian government, bulging youth populations and high unemployment. As a consequence, Fürtig believes that every Arab regime at least faces the possibility of succumbing to a popular uprising. "If it is a revolution it will be a revolution of the entire region and not only of one or two countries," Fürtig said. Fürtig breaks the Arab Spring down into three classes of states. He says Egypt and Tunisia have the best chance of becoming pluralistic democracies. Meanwhile, Libya, Syria and Yemen have unclear futures due to the on-going violence in those countries. The Sunni monarchies - Morocco, Jordan, Saudi Arabia and the Gulf states - appear to be more resilient to demands for political change. According to Fürtig, these nations all influence each other, but the impact tends to be indirect. Successful change in Tunisia, for example, could have an effect on far-away Saudi Arabia, but it will take a long time to play out. "Let's be frank - it will not be a domino effect," he said. "If you try to paint it in pictures, it's not a domino effect - it's a butterfly effect. It has its effects but not direct ones, not immediate ones." Counterrevolution As Egypt and Tunisia undergo political transition and Libya, Syria and Yemen face civil war, the Sunni monarchies are rallying to hold the line against the spread of a liberal revolution throughout the broader region. When protesters took to the streets in the tiny Gulf kingdom of Bahrain, Saudi Arabia intervened militarily to prevent the fall of its neighboring royal family. Since then, the Sunni monarchies have increased their cooperation and even invited Morocco and Jordan to join the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC), an economic and security organization once exclusive to the Gulf states. "Saudi Arabia is projecting itself as the lynchpin of this monarchical conservative status quo block against Egypt, Iran and other states in the region that it now views as risky," Ulrichsen said.  Saudi Arabia and other Gulf states intervened in Bahrain  As the regional lynchpin, reform may have to begin in Saudi Arabia before it can truly take root in the neighboring Gulf nations. "For Saudi Arabia's neighbors, yes, until something happens in Saudi Arabia the chances for any change are quite slim," Ulrichsen said. Although the US and EU have tried to re-orient their foreign policies to side with the demonstrators, they are unlikely to put any kind of pressure on Saudi Arabia that runs the risk destabilizing the world's largest petroleum exporter. As a consequence, the "counterrevolution" against the Arab Spring led by the House of Saud in Riyadh is likely to continue. Goldstone, however, believes that the popular uprisings will ultimately lead to varying degrees of political reform throughout the Arab world. "What we're seeing in the Arab Spring is part of a global and historical trend toward people demanding their right to hold their governments accountable and this has spread globally," Goldstone said. Author: Spencer Kimball Editor: Rob Mudge


Egypt court sentences 11 to death over fatal football riots An Egyptian court has handed down the death penalty to 11 men after they were found guilty of being involved in the country's worst football violence three years ago. Another 41 defendants received prison sentences. The sentences announced on Tuesday came at the end of a retrial after Egypt's top appeals court overturned a 2013 verdict in the same case in which 21 defendants were condemned to death. A second appeal is still possible. The clashes between long-time rivals of Port Said's al-Masry team and visiting Cairo team al-Ahly took place on February 1, 2012 during Egypt's tense and highly politicized period of military rule following the 2011 January revolution which brought an end to three decades of rule by dictator Hosni Mubarak. Seventy-four people were killed in the football stadium violence. Deadly violence Following the 2013 match, al-Masry supporters stormed the pitch where they began attacking al-Ahly players and fans. According to witness accounts at the time, spectators were stabbed with knives and pushed from the top of the stadium. Many of those killed in the riots were crushed as they attempted to escape the stadium from the violence. Of the 73 people charged with premeditated murder, negligence or possession of weapons in connection with the rioting, 21 were acquitted on Tuesday.  Conspiracy accusations Al-Ahly Ultras previously accused members of Egypt's police force of conspiring against them with their football rivals due to their prominent role in the 2011 revolution and subsequent anti-government rallies. In April the judge had referred the sentencing of the 11 to Egypt's Grand Mufti, the country's most senior religious authority, a step towards the death penalty. ksb/bw (Reuters, dpa)


#HappyBirthday! The hashtag turns 10 The practice may still be annoying for some, but after a decade of existence, the hashtag is definitely here to stay. Here's a look back at how hashtags happened and their most popular uses. It used to be referred to by many as the number, or pound, sign. Nowadays, thanks to its widespread use on social media, the symbol # is undeniably known as the hashtag. This function was invented 10 years ago, when technology specialist Chris Messina proposed to use it to create groups on Twitter on August 23, 2007: It took nearly two years for Twitter to institutionalize the practice, by adding a hyperlink to all hashtags in tweets, on July 2, 2009. A key that now means so much more than just "number" Previously existing Twitter practices, such as Follow Fridays, were turned into one word preceded by a hashtag. More tags were created for other days of the week, such as the popular #MotivationMonday. In 2010, Twitter added Trending Topics on its front page, through which users could easily discover all hashtags rapidly gaining in popularity. Another hashtag breakthrough came with the photo-sharing application Instagram, launched in October 2010. "It became quickly clear that one couldn't find pictures again without descriptions," Chris Messina told German press agency dpa. The term "hashtag" entered the Oxford English Dictionary in 2013, which also named it Word of the Year; it was added to Merriam-Webster's Dictionary in 2014. Read more: Merriam-Webster goes internet savvy Hashtags have since been adopted on all social media platforms, including Facebook, Snapchat and Google+. The rise of hashtag activism During the 2009-2010 Iranian election protests, social media users widely used the symbol in their posts, turning the practice into an international style of writing. The Egyptian government shut off internet access shortly after the January 25 Revolution Other political protest campaigns of the early 2010s were organized through hashtags, such as #OccupyWallStreet and #Jan25 for the Egyptian revolution which began on January 25, 2011. The hashtag became a useful instrument to create awareness for social causes and movements. Over six million people posted a tweet with the hashtag #BringBackOurGirls in support of the Nigerian schoolgirls kidnapped by the Islamist group Boko Haram. Former US First Lady Michelle Obama was among the users who did: However, "hashtag activism" became criticized by some as a lazy way of taking action, just like signing an online petition. On the other hand, the case of the Nigerian schoolgirls first garnered international attention after supporters massively demanded their safe return through Twitter. Read more: Can online campaigns bring offline change? Some people avoided social media during the #IceBucketChallenge - Mark Zuckerberg couldn't... Beyond the numerous "slacktivist" trending hashtags, the popular #BlackLivesMatter demonstrates how a hashtag can also durably unify a community to establish a political movement. In other cases, hashtags have actually managed to get people who aren't typically activists to leave their computers screens for a good cause. During the summer of 2014, the hashtag #IceBucketChallenge was an awareness campaign which incited countless people to dump a bucket of icy water over their heads - a fundraising stunt that allowed the ALS Association to raise millions of dollars for research for Lou Gehrig's disease. #Sarcasm and live-tweets Beyond social causes and other unifying slogans that spontaneously appeared after terrorist attacks à la #JeSuisCharlie, hashtags are also widely used to express sarcasm, as a form of humorous meta-commentary. This sometimes excessive approach was parodied in a hilarious sketch by Jimmy Fallon and Justin Timberlake in September 2013. Beyond the now classic #LOL, Trump's cryptic #covfefe remains popular weeks after he posted a tweet with the typo. Read more: COVFEFE Act proposed to preserve President Donald Trump’s tweets In some cases, the sarcasm becomes brutal - derogatory slogans can be turned into hashtags used to troll individuals or organizations. Most often, however, hashtags create a sense of community, allowing people with common interests to engage with each other through social media. Late-night show hosts in the US regularly prompt new hashtags that turn into trending topics. From the Oscars to the Eurovision Song Contest, TV-related live-tweeting is an extremely popular hobby. Those who wish to avoid spoilers should definitely avoid Twitter. That's especially true if you're behind on the series "The Walking Dead." It was the most popular show on social media for the 2016-2017 season, with two million interactions on Facebook and Twitter for each new episode aired on AMC. The hashtag's history is directly connected to the development of Twitter, which celebrated it's 10 anniversary last year. Here's a gallery with 10 unforgettable Twitter moments: Twitter co-founder and CEO Jack Dorsey, or simply @jack, posted the very first tweet on March 21, 2006: "just setting up my twttr." Many more users on the microblogging platform would start out with a similar message, but his got tens of thousands of retweets. American television host Ellen DeGeneres posted this snapshot during the Oscars 2014, which she called the "best photo ever," and an incredible number of people agreed. With over 3 million retweets and a bunch of famous actors in the picture, this selfie is the most successful tweet of all time. This catchphrase became a huge viral hit recently: Some people are even getting "Damn Daniel" tattoos now. Two Californian teens, Daniel Lara (l.) and Josh Holz, posted a 30-second video where Josh praises his best friend's clothes, repeating "Damn Daniel." It earned the young Internet stars a lifetime supply of sneakers - they made headlines again by donating them to young patients in hospitals. Goofy entertainment works well on Twitter, but countless tweets react to serious current events as well. During the Arab Spring, #Egypt was used on Twitter by locals and journalists reporting about the fall of the Egyptian regime. In 2011, longtime President Hosni Mubarak resigned as a result of the Egyptian revolution. Journalists worldwide also fetched their information on Twitter. On January 7, 2015, two Islamist militants forced their way into the offices of the French satirical magazine "Charlie Hebdo," killing 11 people and injuring 11 more. The hashtag #jesuischarlie was used on Twitter to express compassion with the victims of the massacre. A few weeks after the attacks, the hashtag had already appeared five million times on Twitter. In the German tweetosphere, the hashtag #aufschrei (which translates as outcry) was picked up by many Twitter users in 2013 to share sexist and misogynist experiences. It has become a symbol for feminism, but is now also used to denounce different forms of injustice. After winning the 2014 FIFA World Cup in Brazil, German star players Lukas Podolski and Bastian Schweinsteiger posted this winning selfie directly from the field. Not only did the dream team win the FIFA World Cup, they also earned 80,000 retweets with this tweet. Which achievement makes them prouder? The first son of Prince William and his wife Catherine was born on July 22, 2013. Breaking with the tradition of posting the announcement outside Buckingham Palace first, the birth of Royal Baby George was made public via Twitter, stating, "Her Royal Highness The Duchess of Cambridge was safely delivered of a son at 4.24pm." A similar tweet was posted when Baby Charlotte came in 2015. The US president posted this picture of him hugging his wife Michelle after being re-elected for his second term of presidency in November 2012. Retweeted nearly 800,000 times, this is one of the most successful tweets ever, reflecting Obama's popularity on social media. Some of the most successful tweets are quite simple, fitting Twitter's 140-character limit. In 2011, this even shorter motivational message went viral: "Never be afraid to dream." Certainly contributing to its popularity was the person who wrote it: Stefani Germanotta, aka megastar Lady Gaga. Author: Aaron Skiba 


'Freedom of expression is at an all-time low' in Egypt despite Alaa Abdel-Fattah's release Prominent Egyptian blogger Alaa Abdel-Fattah has been released on bail. Is it a sign of increased freedom of expression from Cairo? Egyptian filmmaker and activist Omar Hamilton says it's not. Prominent blogger Alaa Abdel-Fattah faces 15 years in prison, accused of organizing a protest against the government. On September 15, he was released on bail. In August, dozens of activists went on hunger strike protest the continued detention of protestors and activists. DW: How significant is the release of Alaa Abdel-Fattah for you and other people in Egypt's journalism and activist scene? Omar Robert Hamilton: It's a refreshing piece of good news, but people are not celebrating too much. It's just a chance to take a breath. He still has charges against him, and the trial is still ongoing. The judge has taken himself off the case, and we don't know exactly why. Until all the charges are dropped, and the protest law is rescinded, no one has any illusions that Egypt is moving in the direction of justice. What message do you think the judiciary and the government are trying to convey with his release? Alaa Abdel-Fattah spent days in jail, with his sister still campaigning from prison for his release It's very hard to guess what they're thinking. Alaa's sister, Sanaa, has also been in jail since June 21 for protesting. She's been on hunger strike now for 20 days. The judge set her next trial date for October 11. And then, three days later, the judge takes himself off Alaa's case. Maybe this is a case of the state taking with one hand and giving with the other. It could be any number of things - that they want a tougher judge, or that they were significantly embarrassed when the prosecution showed a home video of Alaa's wife, which they stole when they raided their house at night without a permit. That's a story that traveled all around the world. Has the government's attitude towards critics changed your job as a journalist? It has made everything much harder. Authoritarianism is at a peak level that it didn't even reach under Mubarak. There is an attempt to shut down all the usual incubators of dissent, like in the universities, the media, NGOs or human rights lawyers. It's a systematic, across-the-board crackdown. They know where the revolution was born, and which networks brought it to life, and they're trying to shut them down, piece by piece. So it's very difficult to work right now. You can get arrested for anything. You can get arrested for putting up stickers or for having a letter from a prisoner in your bag. Have you ever been arrested ? No. I've only been detained briefly and had some equipment confiscated by the army during protests. Egypt's President, Abdul Fattah el-Sissi, has just passed his 100-day mark. On a scale of one to ten, what mark would you give him for upholding freedom of expression? El-Sissi's government introduced strict protest laws that allow the government to use force against protestors Zero. The first thing they did after taking power was shut down all the Islamist TV channels and, piece by piece, they're trying to close down every last avenue there is. The police are building something called the electronic grip, which they're going to use to monitor all kinds of colloquial Arabic that people use on social media. All the independent satellite channels have been co-opted into the media line. There are about 25 people who control the media, and if you get those people on your side, then you're fine. The independent newspapers that still dare to publish anything critical have a very clear red line that the editors won't cross. So freedom of expression is at an all-time low here. If you were in government, what would be the first three things you would change to guarantee freedom of expression and the media? Well, they need to stop the things that they're doing. The infrastructure that existed was a relatively vibrant atmosphere of independent media - and of free speech and of people still speaking up. A radical overhaul of the members of government are needed, or there needs to be a significant pushback from the public to show that they are not willing to be told what they can and cannot say. It will come, but right now, things are getting worse and worse. If I was the government, I wouldn't need to do anything to guarantee the freedom of media. I would just need to not attack it. Omar Robert Hamilton is an Egyptian filmmaker. He writes for both Egyptian as well as international newspapers like The Guardian. He is also a founding member of the activist media collective Mosireen.


Sinai attacks show 'IS' influence growing The attacks in Sinai were claimed by Sinai Province, an Egyptian militant group that has pledged allegiance to the "Islamic State" group. Kristen McTighe reports from Cairo on its growing influence in the region. As details of the deadly assault on the town of Sheikh Zuweid continue to emerge, the attack underscores the growing strength of "Islamic State" (IS) militants and the inability of the Egypt's army to quell violence and restore stability, analysts say. "This was very expected, it was not surprise at all," Dr. Khalil al-Anani, a scholar at the Johns Hopkins School of Advanced International Studies in Washington, DC and an expert on Islamist movements and Egyptian politics, told DW. "The Egyptian army doesn't seem to be able to prevent such attacks, the regime policy failed and it shows [President Abdel-Fatah] el-Sissi is very weak right now." Formally known as Ansar Bayt al-Maqdis, the group first emerged following the country's 2011 revolution and attacks were directed mainly against Israel. The government's trouble controlling the country's vast northern territory, where weapons smuggling from both Libya and the Gaza Strip was rife, has allowed the group to flourish. Following the military-led ouster of former Islamist President Mohamed Morsi, the group began to shift its focus to fighting against the government and security forces. In September 2013, the group claimed responsibility for one of its most high-profile attacks with an attempted assassination of then-Interior Minister Mohammed Ibrahim, targeting his convoy with a car bomb. Inspired by al Qaeda Initially seen as inspired by al Qaeda, it renamed itself Sinai Peninsula and pledged allegiance to IS in November 2014. It has since been involved in suicide bombings, assassinations and beheadings. The region is becoming increasingly volatile The return of Egyptians fighting for militant groups in Libya, Syria and Iraq has also contributed to the group's increasing capabilities. "I think a lot of the reasoning behind their increased capabilities over the past couple of years has been that fighters have trained abroad and they've come back, not necessarily sent back by the Islamic State to cause trouble, but they've returned home after being abroad and they've brought these skills with them," Zack Gold, a visiting fellow at the Institute for National Security Studies in Tel Aviv, told DW. But while the group has been carrying out frequent attacks against the army, the scale of and tactics used in the recent attack signals a sharp escalation in the group's capabilities. "What I think is unprecedented, and what I didn't expect, was the assault on Sheikh Zuweid because it really seems to have moved their operations from attacks on the state security apparatus to attacks directly on the population," said Gold. "They may have not run in and slaughtered people, but shooting in civilian areas, laying down IED in civilian areas, was basically an assault on the civilian population, even if you are laying down those traps for the military." New cycle of violence Previously, Gold said, violence in the Sinai had become a "very predictable cycle" of militant escalations followed by massive military maneuvers inside the Sinai Penninsula since the July 2013 military coup. "Frankly we've seen for all the hundreds of militants that have allegedly been killed or captured by the Egyptian state, the group itself has only been getting stronger," said Gold. Making the situation more difficult to gauge, for the past two years the Egyptian government has restricted media access to the northern Sinai region. "Our surprise at the attacks in Sinai ought to be a reminder that we know precious little about what happens in the peninsula - and especially regarding radical groups like Ansar Bayt al-Maqdis," Dr H.A. Hellyer, associate fellow in International security at the Royal United Services Institute in London and the Brookings Center for Middle East Policy in DC., told DW. The Egyptian army says its operations have been successful and often publishes grisly photos online like those posted by Egyptian army spokesman Mohamed Samir on his Facebook account following the attacks in Sheikh Zuweid showing scorched and bloodied bodies of what he said were "despicable terrorist elements that were eliminated." "Overall, the government's response has not been helpful and in some ways it's actually been harmful," said Gold. "A lot of the policies that are put in place in order to clamp down on the militants are almost in no way affecting the militants maneuvering and they are putting a great deal of stress on the local population." Making life difficult Since the military ouster of Morsi, Egyptian army operations in Sinai have included house demolitions and the forced relocation of thousands of residents to build a buffer zone between Egypt and the Gaza strip. Curfews have been imposed and Internet and phone networks are often shut down during military operations, making daily life even more difficult for locals who have long been caught in the crossfire of militants and the army. Locals have also been the victims of beheadings and executions by militants. "I don't know if this is necessarily in the immediate term radicalizing local populations…but even if they are not signing up and joining and operating with the jihadi forces, they certainly aren't willing to join the military against them," said Gold. Sissi's critics says he's fighting on the wrong front Others say the government's repeatedly harsh crackdown on the Muslim Brotherhood, the group from which former president Morsi hails, has distracted the government from the real threat of jihadist groups. "There has been a crisis since 2013 and one of the main mistakes of the Sissi regime is that it is fighting in the wrong place," said Dr. Al-Anani, from the Johns Hopkins School of Advanced International Studies. "The Sissi regime will not be able to win the war against terrorism in Sinai without having a solution with the Muslim Brotherhood. They cannot fight such wars on both fronts at the same time." The government has consistently blamed the Muslim Brotherhood for attacks the group has denounced and that have been claimed by jihadist groups such as the Sinai Province. The Sinai Province views the Muslim Brotherhood as traitors, but it has criticized Morsi's ouster by the military and declared war against Sissi's government and the army. "Why do they fail so badly vs IS? Because they've been busy using the IS threat to go after their non-IS opponents," wrote Iyad El-Baghdadi, an activist originally from the United Arab Emirates but now based in Oslo, Norway after being expelled from the country, on his Twitter account. "How many attacks has ABM (IS in #Egypt) launched and claimed, just to have Sissi say no, it was the MB (and the MB say it was Sissi)?" he added.


Opinion: A step towards democracy - hopefully Good riddance to Mohammed Morsi, but his ouster by the military is a dangerous setback, says DW's Rainer Sollich. The Egyptian revolution may have only just begun and the potential for violence is still great. Rainer Sollich is head of DW's Arabic Service First, it was Hosni Mubarak, now it's Mohammed Morsi. Once again, the military waited until the last minute to take the anti-Morsi protesters' side and topple an increasingly unpopular president - in this case, a president who was democratically elected, but also increasingly polarized the nation. The outcome is as clear as it is conflicting; the military remains the decisive power in Egypt. It alone can prevent the state from collapse. At the same time, the armed forces will not show their hand to anyone. By positioning itself as a savior in times of crisis while maintaining its political dominance across all important issues, it also serves its own, economic interests. Respect for Egyptian protest It's not exactly democratic, but democratic culture does not seem to be high on the list of priorities in Egypt these days. Those who have been calling for Morsi to step down in a peaceful fashion in the last few days, are brave and deserve our respect. Those who believe in a democratic and pluralistic society cannot seriously want a president like Morsi at the helm of the Arab world's most populous country. Despite his often "pragmatic" approach, one could well argue that he was gradually undermining those values and placing his supporters in key positions in the government and elsewhere. Islam and democracy can go together just like Christianity and democracy - the protesters in Egypt have shown that they had the power to prompt the military to oust Morsi. What is questionable though is the democratic credentials of the Muslim Brotherhood, even if we cannot tar all of them with the same brush. But we cannot overlook that too many of their members are worryingly ready to use violence. But there is also a shocking tendency towards violence among Morsi's opponents, on the streets, but also among liberals and revolutionaries, frustrated youngsters and former Mubarak supporters. Unfortunately, democratic culture seems to be alien to all of these groups. The fact that many are now calling for members of the Muslim Brotherhood to be politically ostracized and marginalized shows that there is no real sense of democratic procedures in Egypt. Dangerous polarization Morsi's ousting can only be a good thing for Egypt, it could even be an encouraging sign for the whole region that in a country so strategically important for the Arab world, people can take to the streets and challenge the dominance of Islamists. But it's by no means a given. There's a dangerous divide in Egyptian society and the dire state of the economy will likely fan the flames of aggression further. The situation is deeply ambivalent: the military action was necessary in this situation, but it can also be seen as a setback in the transition to democracy. The Egyptian revolution may have only just begun and the potential for violence is still great.


All eyes on Cairo as ousted Mubarak stands trial Ousted Egyptian president Hosni Mubarak is in court for a historic trial. But questions remain over whether he will be well enough to last and face the charges of murder and corruption laid against him. Former Egyptian president Hosni Mubarak is standing trial in the capital in the Cairo Police Academy which once bore his name. Mubarak, who oversaw a corrupt system that routinely tortured people in detention and crushed opponents, is facing charges of stealing millions of dollars from the Egyptian state and ordering the killing of over 800 protesters during the January 25 uprising.  If found guilty, the former president could face the death penalty. Many in Egypt had been skeptical that the 83-year-old would ever see the inside of a court room, despite Health Minister Amr Hilmi's recent announcement that Mubarak was well enough to be tried.  Mubarak's health failed dramatically after 18 days of street protests finally brought to an end his 30-year, iron-fisted rule in February. It is said that soon after his spectacular downfall, Mubarak briefly slipped into a coma. In the event of Mubarak being too ill to attend, there had been some discussion over moving the trail to Sharm el-Sheikh. But any deviation from the original plan to try him in Cairo would have angered the hundreds of protestors who have returned to the capital's now iconic Tahrir Square to demand that Mubarak should face swift justice in a public trial. Egypt  on tenterhooks A Cairo trial was a key demand of the protesters who ousted the Mubarak regime, and with tensions already high between Mubarak's critics and the ruling Supreme Council Armed Forces (SCAF) over the speed of reforms and the bringing to justice of former regime figures, there was a danger that any delay or postponement would trigger further unrest. Even the desired verdict may not be enough to prevent what some regional experts believe to be an unavoidable escalation.  The SCAF under Tantawi faces pressure from the street "Finding Mubarak guilty might provide a form of closure for Egyptians but it would not directly affect the deteriorating situation in the country," Kristian Ulrichsen, a Middle East and North African expert at the London School of Economics, told Deutsche Welle. "Egyptians are finding that the removal of an outdated leader is merely the tip of an iceberg and that the networks of vested interests and crony capitalists with stakes in the regime are almost impossible to dislodge." According to Ulrichsen, none of this will be directly affected by Mubarak's verdict. "On the one hand, this trial will satisfy many victims of the Mubarak regime and help to calm the protesters who demanded it," Stephan Roll, an Egypt expert at the German Institute for International and Security Affairs, told Deutsche Welle. "On the other, many followers of the old regime will be very angry, which of course could further destabilize the situation." It's vital to comprehend that the regime consisted not only of the Mubarak family and some close allies and cronies but that it also comprised a substantial part of the population itself, Roll added. "The former ruling National Democratic Party alone was said to have up to two million members," he said. Military rulers accused of protecting regime Many in the opposition believe that the SCAF, granted powers of government until elections originally scheduled for September can be held, is attempting to hinder the process against Mubarak who, as a former military man, is effectively one of their own. Field Marshal Hussein Tantawi, the man who heads the SCAF and who is Egypt's de facto leader at the moment, was Mubarak's defense minister for 20 years.  Protests in Tahrir Square could again turn violent in the future As well as stalling on reforms, delaying the elections and stifling dissent in much the same way as Mubarak did, the SCAF is accused of protecting former regime figures who remain in positions of power within the interim government structure and of trying to avoid publicly humiliating its former commander-in-chief. "Mubarak and his immediate family fell in February but the networks that sustained him in power remain embedded," said Ulrichsen. "For this reason it is unlikely that any other than the worst abusers of power and corruption will be brought to trial," he added. The Mubarak trial puts the SCAF is an awkward position. The allegiances towards many of those who have already faced trial and those who could be brought before a court remain. But Egypt's military leaders are also acutely aware that fulfilling their promise of bringing to justice all those accused would ease the pressure rising on the streets of Cairo. "From the point of view of the military leadership this trial should probably draw a line under the process of coming to terms with the past," said Roll. "However, from the point of view of the protest movement and many parts of the population, this trial should be just the beginning." Dozens of ministers, officials and businessmen associated with the old regime are already in prison pending investigations into a range of charges while several ministers have already been sentenced to jail in corruption cases. But it is Mubarak's trial which holds the most significance for Egypt and the country's painful and stalled transition to democracy. Author: Nick Amies Editor: Michael Knigge


Egypt's Sufis suffer economic hardship Amid celebrations at their largest religious festival of the year, Egypt’s Sufis are struggling with economic and security concerns. Farid Farid reports from Sayeda Zeinab. In the historic downtown district of Sayeda Zeinab that bears the same name of the Prophet Mohammed's grand-daughter, over 10,000 Egyptians gathered recently to celebrate - an uncommon occurrence ever since a law was passed in December 2013 preventing mass assemblies. Sufis, following a mystical form of Islam as opposed to the orthodox Sunni and Shia branches, make up around 15 percent of Egyptian Muslims with hundreds of tariqat (orders) that venerate a rich tradition of remembering significant Muslim saints. The celebrations offer a welcome respite from the many hardships "Sayeda Zeinab represents everything to me. She's my whole life really," said Rabie Zaaloul, 63, who traveled from Mansoura, around 130 kilometers (80 miles) northeast of Cairo. "I come from the first day and stay the whole duration, feeding people, giving them khidma [an ethical act to provide a service for the poor - the ed.] and we butcher the meat daily. We are here to serve them, the needy are really struggling this year, this is our moral duty," he told DW in front of the Sayeda Zeinab mosque. "It's a welfare that's not a welfare," said Paola Abenante, an anthropologist at the University of Milano-Bicocca who has extensively researched the practices of Egyptian Sufis. "It depends on private giving, in a moment where social disparities are even bigger there is even more charity beyond the neo-liberal sense," she told DW. Permalink http://p.dw.com/p/1HSd2 Economic hardship Egypt's inflation reached a three-decade high in April, which has caused food and medicine prices to surge. The pound has lost half of its value since the government floated it to secure a $12 billion loan from the International Monetary Fund in November 2016. Read more: IMF approves $12 billion Egypt loan agreement Sayed, 42, hawked little trinkets along with his mother Om Sayed, 64, just outside the mosque. "I used to attend the hadra [a dance ritual - the ed.] but now not so much. There's a stagnation in the market so we have to keep on working," he told DW. He explained that economic and security pressures were affecting his humble trade. "The cost has doubled in making our festive merchandise. It would cost 600 Egyptian pounds (30 euros) for 100 meters and now its 1,200 pounds. Sometimes we get told by local authorities to pack up because there are a lot of security problems in the country. They are afraid that someone would blow up something." Egypt has witnessed a dramatic rise in terrorist attacks against religious minorities. In March the "Islamic State" (IS) group in the Sinai posted a video showing the beheading two Sufis for "sorcery" and claimed responsibility for church bombings the following month, which killed over 45 people. Read more: Egypt orders military trial for 48 'Islamic State' suspects over church attacks 'IS' warns of further attacks on Egypt's Christians Om Sayed: "I want a revolution" Om Sayed, who accompanies her son all over Egypt to hawk at moulids [religious festivals - the ed.], is unaffected by the religious atmosphere. She has more pressing issues to deal with. Calling for a revolution "We want things to loosen up. When you can't eat or drink, what you gonna do? We haven't gone through a year like this. I come to sell and leave - the moulid is crucial for me." She reminisced about the millions in Tahrir Square and throughout the country who called for bread, freedom and social justice in January 2011 which toppled former dictator Hosni Mubarak. Read more: Mubarak walks free while Egypt's revolutionaries remain behind bars "We want another revolution to straighten things out. You see what's happening to us. We want something serious. I was in Tahrir and sold a lot of merchandise," she said. "People are struggling these days, I want a revolution so people can be comfortable." Valerie Hoffman, head of religious studies department at University of Illinois told DW that "many of those who offer food at the Sufi khidmas are themselves very poor, in which case it really embodies both a willingness to sacrifice for the sake of God in honor of the saint who is celebrated at the moulid, and it promotes the bonds of love that Sufis cherish." Rabie Zaaloul says the festival's spiritual value is more important than anything else Zaaloul, a retired official with the ministry of electricity, meditated on the spiritual value the moulid gives him beyond materialistic concerns. "We are merchants of love," he enthusiastically noted. "We love people and people love us back, this is our currency."


Readers demand more Western support for Egyptian protesters Readers agree with Deutsche Welle's Bettina Marx that the response from Western countries to ongoing protests in Egypt has been far too cautious. The following comments reflect the views of DW-WORLD.DE readers. DW-WORLD.DE reserves the right to edit for length and appropriateness of content. 

Opinion: 'Nothing but doubt and indecision in the West' 
I fully agree with Bettina Marx's article. The so-called democratic countries like Europe and the USA are displaying more than indecision. They are displaying sheer hypocrisy. They preach democracy, but only when it produces the kind of governments the West wants. Otherwise the West will do its best to isolate, undermine or even subvert these democratically elected governments. Chile under Allende and Hamas in Gaza are classic examples. The West "loathes" dictators like Saddam Hussein, but only when the dictators show any sign of disobedience to the masters in the West that create them. It is hypocrisies like these that drove people to hate the West. -- 
Tony, Australia 
Bravo, Ms. Marx! As a Canadian living in Turkey for almost a decade, and as a great admirer of Egypt and its people, I would like to thank you for your excellent, hard-hitting commentary on the failure of the "West" to support Egypt's brave and heroic citizens. One tries very hard to understand the cynicism and neglect of Western countries - led by the USA and including Canada - that just never seem to understand the importance of their support of such peaceful and powerful events. The indecision - and especially the outright division - of the European nations is especially troubling. - 
William, Turkey 
I am so disgusted with the lack of support from the so-called "democratic" countries, particularly from the United States, Britain, France and Germany. Mubarak's "loyalty" has been bought and paid for by the US. When is this country going to realize that you cannot buy friendship! -- 
Margaret, United States 

West worries over the prospect of Mideast democracy 
The uncertainty of the West is like pouring oil on the fire. By permitting Mubarak to stay, the revolution will be much worse and likely end with bloodshed or, if the army stays neutral, in an uncontrolled revolution engulfing the total Middle East. Last weekend's performance of EU politicians at the Munich Security Conference was a poor demonstration of incapability. -- 
Eric, The Netherlands 
Compiled by Sean Sinico 
Editor: Susan Houlton Opinion: 'Nothing but doubt and indecision in the West' 
I fully agree with Bettina Marx's article. The so-called democratic countries like Europe and the USA are displaying more than indecision. They are displaying sheer hypocrisy. They preach democracy, but only when it produces the kind of governments the West wants. Otherwise the West will do its best to isolate, undermine or even subvert these democratically elected governments. Chile under Allende and Hamas in Gaza are classic examples. The West "loathes" dictators like Saddam Hussein, but only when the dictators show any sign of disobedience to the masters in the West that create them. It is hypocrisies like these that drove people to hate the West. -- 
Tony, Australia 
Bravo, Ms. Marx! As a Canadian living in Turkey for almost a decade, and as a great admirer of Egypt and its people, I would like to thank you for your excellent, hard-hitting commentary on the failure of the "West" to support Egypt's brave and heroic citizens. One tries very hard to understand the cynicism and neglect of Western countries - led by the USA and including Canada - that just never seem to understand the importance of their support of such peaceful and powerful events. The indecision - and especially the outright division - of the European nations is especially troubling. - 
William, Turkey 
I am so disgusted with the lack of support from the so-called "democratic" countries, particularly from the United States, Britain, France and Germany. Mubarak's "loyalty" has been bought and paid for by the US. When is this country going to realize that you cannot buy friendship! -- 
Margaret, United States 

West worries over the prospect of Mideast democracy 
The uncertainty of the West is like pouring oil on the fire. By permitting Mubarak to stay, the revolution will be much worse and likely end with bloodshed or, if the army stays neutral, in an uncontrolled revolution engulfing the total Middle East. Last weekend's performance of EU politicians at the Munich Security Conference was a poor demonstration of incapability. -- 
Eric, The Netherlands 
Compiled by Sean Sinico 
Editor: Susan Houlton I fully agree with Bettina Marx's article. The so-called democratic countries like Europe and the USA are displaying more than indecision. They are displaying sheer hypocrisy. They preach democracy, but only when it produces the kind of governments the West wants. Otherwise the West will do its best to isolate, undermine or even subvert these democratically elected governments. Chile under Allende and Hamas in Gaza are classic examples. The West "loathes" dictators like Saddam Hussein, but only when the dictators show any sign of disobedience to the masters in the West that create them. It is hypocrisies like these that drove people to hate the West. -- 
Tony, Australia 
Bravo, Ms. Marx! As a Canadian living in Turkey for almost a decade, and as a great admirer of Egypt and its people, I would like to thank you for your excellent, hard-hitting commentary on the failure of the "West" to support Egypt's brave and heroic citizens. One tries very hard to understand the cynicism and neglect of Western countries - led by the USA and including Canada - that just never seem to understand the importance of their support of such peaceful and powerful events. The indecision - and especially the outright division - of the European nations is especially troubling. - 
William, Turkey 
I am so disgusted with the lack of support from the so-called "democratic" countries, particularly from the United States, Britain, France and Germany. Mubarak's "loyalty" has been bought and paid for by the US. When is this country going to realize that you cannot buy friendship! -- 
Margaret, United States 

West worries over the prospect of Mideast democracy 
The uncertainty of the West is like pouring oil on the fire. By permitting Mubarak to stay, the revolution will be much worse and likely end with bloodshed or, if the army stays neutral, in an uncontrolled revolution engulfing the total Middle East. Last weekend's performance of EU politicians at the Munich Security Conference was a poor demonstration of incapability. -- 
Eric, The Netherlands 
Compiled by Sean Sinico 
Editor: Susan Houlton Bravo, Ms. Marx! As a Canadian living in Turkey for almost a decade, and as a great admirer of Egypt and its people, I would like to thank you for your excellent, hard-hitting commentary on the failure of the "West" to support Egypt's brave and heroic citizens. One tries very hard to understand the cynicism and neglect of Western countries - led by the USA and including Canada - that just never seem to understand the importance of their support of such peaceful and powerful events. The indecision - and especially the outright division - of the European nations is especially troubling. - 
William, Turkey 
I am so disgusted with the lack of support from the so-called "democratic" countries, particularly from the United States, Britain, France and Germany. Mubarak's "loyalty" has been bought and paid for by the US. When is this country going to realize that you cannot buy friendship! -- 
Margaret, United States 

West worries over the prospect of Mideast democracy 
The uncertainty of the West is like pouring oil on the fire. By permitting Mubarak to stay, the revolution will be much worse and likely end with bloodshed or, if the army stays neutral, in an uncontrolled revolution engulfing the total Middle East. Last weekend's performance of EU politicians at the Munich Security Conference was a poor demonstration of incapability. -- 
Eric, The Netherlands 
Compiled by Sean Sinico 
Editor: Susan Houlton I am so disgusted with the lack of support from the so-called "democratic" countries, particularly from the United States, Britain, France and Germany. Mubarak's "loyalty" has been bought and paid for by the US. When is this country going to realize that you cannot buy friendship! -- 
Margaret, United States 

West worries over the prospect of Mideast democracy 
The uncertainty of the West is like pouring oil on the fire. By permitting Mubarak to stay, the revolution will be much worse and likely end with bloodshed or, if the army stays neutral, in an uncontrolled revolution engulfing the total Middle East. Last weekend's performance of EU politicians at the Munich Security Conference was a poor demonstration of incapability. -- 
Eric, The Netherlands 
Compiled by Sean Sinico 
Editor: Susan Houlton West worries over the prospect of Mideast democracy 
The uncertainty of the West is like pouring oil on the fire. By permitting Mubarak to stay, the revolution will be much worse and likely end with bloodshed or, if the army stays neutral, in an uncontrolled revolution engulfing the total Middle East. Last weekend's performance of EU politicians at the Munich Security Conference was a poor demonstration of incapability. -- 
Eric, The Netherlands 
Compiled by Sean Sinico 
Editor: Susan Houlton The uncertainty of the West is like pouring oil on the fire. By permitting Mubarak to stay, the revolution will be much worse and likely end with bloodshed or, if the army stays neutral, in an uncontrolled revolution engulfing the total Middle East. Last weekend's performance of EU politicians at the Munich Security Conference was a poor demonstration of incapability. -- 
Eric, The Netherlands 
Compiled by Sean Sinico 
Editor: Susan Houlton Compiled by Sean Sinico 
Editor: Susan Houlton Editor: Susan Houlton


Egypt's Coptic Christians fear for the future Egypt's Coptic Christian minority has long claimed it suffers discrimination in the Muslim-majority country. Many had hoped that would change in the wake of the revolution, but many fear a return of the old ways. A thick layer of soot has made the cross carved on the wall of the destroyed building hardly recognizable. But the cross is the only thing that indicates that this burned out ruin in the town of Sol was once a church. Today, bricklayers, painters and soldiers are all busy at work on the three-story structure, reconstructing the building that housed two prayer rooms and a Sunday school before an angry mob attacked it and set it on fire. The incident was not an isolated one, nor a new development, according to Youssef Sidhom, editor-in-chief of the one Coptic newspaper in Egypt. "Over the last few decades, Copts have consistently been targets of discrimination and attacks," he told Deutsche Welle, but the community had hoped that Egypt's revolution that toppled the authoritarian regime of Hosni Mubarak would change things for the religious minority. It has not, many Egyptian Christians say. "We didn't expect things to simply go on after the Egyptian revolution like they had before," Sidhom said. A worker helps rebuild the Coptic church destroyed in Sol The church burning was sparked by a romance that ended in tragedy - an illicit relationship between a young Christian man and a Muslim girl. Mahmud, a young Muslim man who was sitting with friends not far from the ruins of the church, told Deutsche Welle that the Christian had raped the girl and then run away. Muslims burned the church down out of anger over the man's escape and the girl was later murdered by her brother and her cousin, a so-called honor killing. "That's our tradition," Mahmud said, saying a relationship between a Muslim and a Christian outside of marriage is the one of the worst things imaginable. History of discrimination Egypt's Christians make up an estimated 10 percent of the country's 80-million population. Often the word Coptic is used to refer to this community as a whole. Although in a narrower sense, the Coptic Orthodox Church refers to the biggest of Egypt's Christian churches. Copts believe their church dates back to 50 BC, when the apostle Mark is said to have visited Egypt. While the early church suffered under the Roman Empire, intermittent persecutions continued after Egypt became a Muslim country. Today's Copts claim that discrimination continues, and say they are not allowed to play the kind of role in Egyptian society that their numbers justify. Christians say they often feel like second-class citizens in their own country. Army reconstruction After the church burning, Egypt's supreme military council ordered that the destroyed building be rebuilt and three days after the fire, reconstruction efforts began with the help of the military and villagers. While soldiers stand guard, others plaster walls and paint. "We're at the construction site every day until midnight," said Ahmad, a lieutenant in the Egyptian army, adding that this was the first time the military had taken part in a project like this.  The Coptic Marymorkos Church in Cairo  He said the costs for the reconstruction were being covered by the military, which hopes that those Copts driven out of Sol by the violence can return. Of the town's 50,000 residents, around 7,000 are Coptic Christians. The military intervention in the affair began in the wake of protests that were held at Egypt's state-run television headquarters. Around 1,000 Copts demanded government help in reconstructing the church and called for an end to the rising tensions between the Coptic and Muslim communities that they claim is being actively stoked by some. "After the revolution, racism among Egyptians has grown even stronger," said Magdy Seif, an orthodox Copt who owns a plastic processing plant in Manshiet Nasser, a shanty town on the desert outskirts of Cairo that is a center for refuse collection. Most of the people who live and work here are Copts. Deadly protests As a protest against what they see as ongoing religious discrimination, Copts from Manshiet Nasser held a demonstration in early March, blocking one of Cairo's main north-south arterial roads near the city's Citadel. Tensions escalated between the protesting Coptic refuse collectors and drivers. Soon, glass bottles and stones were flying through the air, thrown by both sides, according to Seif. The conflict continued into the night before the army moved in to calm the situation, firing shots in the air in a bid to disperse the crowds. But before the conflict ended, the district was littered with wrecked cars and scarred by apartments and houses which had been burned. Thirteen people had lost their lives; at least another 110 were wounded. In the face of the violence, many Copts are now looking back wistfully at the revolution centered around Cairo's Tahrir Square in January and February. Then, it was almost taboo to talk about one's religion, said Seif. "We Egyptians had one common goal, to see Mubarak step down," he said. "Everything else was unimportant."  Seven were killed in this January attack on a Coptic church  Fundamentalist fears But since then, fundamentalist Muslims have began to exert pressure and show more force, according to Mamdouh Nakhla, a lawyer and head of Al-Kalema, a human rights organization based in Cairo. "The Salafis have taken over the Egyptian street in the wake of the revolution without any interference by the police or the military," he said, referring to a stream of Sunni Islam that espouses a literalist reading of scripture and adheres to a conservative, puritan lifestyle. He and others are worried about newly empowered fundamentalist groups, such as the Salafis, working to turn Egypt into their version of what they see as the ideal Islamic state. A leading Salafi sheikh, Mohammed Hussein Yaqoub, described the recent constitutional referendum as a religious conquest at the ballet box. Those who disagreed with the results, he said, could leave the country. For Nakhla, the Egyptian revolution was an ideal time for the Copts. There were no deaths, attacks on churches or harassment by the Muslim majority. But just two weeks ago, two Coptic women were sprayed with a caustic liquid because they were not wearing headscarves. Nakhla believes that bringing down the old secular regime was the first goal of Egypt's extremists, while "after Mubarak's resignation, they are concentrating on their second goal, harassing the Copts." Journalist Sidhom says the army is responsible for the worsening situation the Coptic community finds itself in. "The military is unconcerned with he needs of the community and has opened the way for further discrimination," he said. He hopes that the feeling of national solidarity which bound all Egyptians together in a common cause during the revolution, will win the day. But Seif and Nakhla are skeptical about the future of their country. As in the case with many Egyptians, they want to live in a secular country where religious discrimination does not exist. But they don't see a groundswell of political activism on the horizon, said Seif. "We Copts can't do anything about these changes besides fast and pray," he said. Author: Magdalena Suerbaum (jam) Redaktion: Rob Mudge


Egyptian activists use Twitter to bust censorship Twitter has created a small revolution with a few clicks on a mobile phone. While it's a way to catch up on the latest gossip, Twitter is increasingly being used by journalists and political activists in Egypt. Twitter is the latest way to send a text message. It goes to a collective telephone number and then immediately appears on the Internet, where it can be viewed by or forwarded on to hundreds or even thousands of people. Similar to blogs or Facebook, this exchange of information is particularly important in countries with little or no freedom of the press. Egypt is one of the places where Twitter has caught on quite successfully. There, it has become one of the most important tools of communication for the political opposition. Arrested? Time to tweet "Arrested" - that was the one-word text message that American journalist James Buck sent when he was apprehended by Egyptian police on April 10, 2007. Thanks to the Internet service Twitter, the news reached hundreds of people within minutes. Egyptian activists immediately alerted the authorities in the United States, who jumped into action.  What started off as a social network tool now serves a political purpose as well After only 24 hours in Egyptian detention, Buck was able to send another one-word text message, which read, "Free." "That's the way it is when you join a demonstration in Egypt,” said a cyber-activist whose pseudonym Sandmonkey is the only name he is known by. ”Suddenly, there's huge chaos, and then the police is there and starts arresting people." In this kind of situation, it's important to inform other people as quickly as possible about the latest developments, including lawyers and human rights groups. James Buck's case made the news all over the world. The headline in the US paper Washington Post read, ”Held by Egyptian authorities? Time to tweet.” Egyptians won't forget the protests of April 2007, which spread across the whole country. Opposition groups had called for a national strike, to show solidarity with textile workers who were on strike in the provincial capital Mahala. Violent clashes between activists and the police went on for days. Three people died, hundreds were injured. James Buck was one of the few journalists who had managed to get to Mahala to report about the protests. His text - “arrested” - is probably the most famous text message in the history of the Egyptian opposition movement. Safer for activists Amr Ghrabei, one of the pioneers of the cyber dissident scene recalls another famous tweeting incident. At a demonstration in Cairo, the activist Malek Mustafa had been taken away in a police car. “Thanks to Twitter, different groups of activists kept track of the path the car was taking," Ghrabei said. From his home computer, the activist published the various Twitter messages on the homepage of the opposition movement Kifava  . "Because of that, they actually managed to surround the police car and finally had Malek released," added Ghrabei. In Germany, too, protesters who are arrested during a demonstration call out their names, so that their colleagues can make sure they get legal assistance. Twitter has made it safer for protesters to let people know what is happening to them. That is even more vital in a county like Egypt, which has been under emergency law for decades. If they don't get sufficient legal assistance, protesters are completely at the mercy of the authorities. Police harassment is frequent there, and cases of torture have even been reported.  Egypt has been unter emergency law for decades  Twitter also makes reporting easier for journalists on the ground, said Sandmonkey, since they can right text messages on the spot and don't need access to a computer. "During these protests, all you needed to do was go online, and you were really well informed about the latest developments, because there were activist twittering everywhere," added Sandmonkey, whose blog has become one of the most important independent sources of information in Egypt. Long blog vs. short tweet Nevertheless, Twitter has its drawbacks, too. What started out as a free service now costs money to use. Also, the text limit of 140 characters poses a challenge to those used to writing long-winded blogs. "Twitter helps you to be lazy," said Sandmonkey. "Instead of posting a long text in my blog, I simply write a short tweet or two, that's it." But that hasn't stopped some ambitious twitterers from developing poetry and story forms tailored specifically to the medium. Author: Mahmoud Tawfig / Anke Rasper Editor: Kate Bowen


Protesters killed in Egyptian anti-government uprising Four people died in a day of protests across Egypt inspired by Tunisia's recent uprising. Tens of thousands took to the streets demanding that President Hosni Mubarak step down from office. Police fired teargas and water cannons to disperse protesters in the Egyptian capital, Cairo, in the early hours of Wednesday after a long day of unprecendented protests across the country. Four people died during the protests, which had been energized by Tunisia's recent uprising. Tens of thousands took to the streets on Tuesday to demand that President Hosni Mubarak step aside. Two people were killed in the eastern Egyptian port city of Suez after riot police opened fire on protesters on Tuesday evening. Earlier in the day a policeman also died from injuries sustained in clashes on the streets of Cairo. A fourth man died in a Suez hospital from injuries received on Tuesday. The protests in Egypt, which organizers have vowed to carry on until dawn, are estimated to be the largest since Mubarak took power nearly 30 years ago. President Mubarak has been in power for nearly 30 years Protesters in Egypt's second largest city, Alexandria, tore down a picture of 82-year-old Mubarak and of his son, Gamal, who many Egyptians believe is being groomed for office when his father steps down. Demonstrators hung banners from buildings in Cairo reading "Revolution against oppression" and "Down with Hosni Mubarak." The United States, a close ally of Egypt and a major aid donor, called for restraint from all sides. "Our assessment is that the Egyptian government is stable and is looking for ways to respond to the legitimate needs and interests of the Egyptian people," US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton told reporters in Washington. Copycat protests The demonstrations were calculated to emulate the recent Tunisian uprising that led to President Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali being ousted from power after nearly 23 years in office. Sites such as Twitter and Facebook have been key tools for galvanizing support.  Demonstators were inspired by riots in Tunisia  "We are not less than Tunisia. Tens of thousands went out on the streets demanding their rights until the removal of the president and his escape from the country. We want our rights," organizers said in a statement on Facebook by a group called Revolution Day against Torture, Poverty, Corruption and Unemployment. Those on the streets of Cairo had the same complaints that drove Tunisians to revolt two weeks ago: rising food prices, poverty, unemployment and authoritarian rule. Many Egyptians were calling for the dissolution of parliament as well as higher wages. Others were angry about Egypt's emergency laws, which allow the police to make arrests without charge, and ban unauthorized protests. The Egyptian authorities have rejected any possibility that they might face a similar scenario to Tunisia, but they have moved to reassure the public that subsidies on basic commodities will remain in place. Around 40 percent of Egypt's 80-million-strong population - equivalent to the population of Germany - live on as little as two dollars per day, and many people rely on subsidized goods. Dozens were arrested throughout the country on Tuesday. Riot police used sticks, tear gas and water cannons to try to disperse the crowds, injuring hundreds. Nationwide unrest The demonstrations began around midday with hundreds gathering in north Sinai, blocking the road leading to the airport used by multinational peacekeeping forces. Meanwhile, the Muslim Brotherhood, one of Egypt's largest opposition groups, reported that thousands of protesters were gathered in the coastal city of Alexandria.  Protesters clashed with riot police on the streets of Cairo  The Interior Ministry blamed the Brotherhood for provoking the riot and inciting chaos. They said people were allowed to organize "peaceful protests." In Cairo, thousands marched and carried flags along the city's main streets, until they reached the central Tahrir Square. By nightfall, security forces had failed to disperse the crowds, despite the use of force. The protest - planned in at least 16 cities nationwide - was organized by over a dozen non-governmental organizations and rights groups, which described it as a "Day of Wrath." Author: Joanna Impey (AFP, dpa, Reuters) Editor: Matt Zuvela


Egypt's rocky road to democracy With the Muslim Brotherhood's Mohammed Morsi in power, Egyptian democracy activists fear that their January 2011 revolution has left them behind. They intend to stop the Islamization of Egypt. Almost three months ago Mohammed Morsi took office as the first freely and democratically elected president in the history of Egypt. Since then most Egyptians have been wondering where the Muslim Brotherhood will lead their country. Morsi, who had been underestimated by many Egyptians and international observers, gained respect by his surprising dismissal of the seemingly omnipotent military leadership around Field Marshal Mohammed Hussein Tantawi. But Egyptian democracy activists and Tahrir Square revolutionaries fear for the achievements of the revolution of January 25, 2011 - and fear a creeping Islamization of the state. Writer and women's activist Mansoura ez-Eldin is one of the artists, writers and intellectuals who made up the broad protest movement against the authoritarian regime of Hosni Mubarak. But there is not much left of the euphoria she felt over the egalitarian "spirit of Tahrir Square" and during the fall of Mubarak in February 2011: "Many of us thought at the time that Mubarak was the problem. But reality, and also what has happened in the last few months, show that the real problems of this country run far deeper - and that in a certain way the Mubarak regime kept a lid on them," she told DW. What remains of the 'revolution of dignity'? Morsi has cleverly freed himself from domination by the military Of course the heterogeneous democracy movement that emerged out of various youth workers, Facebook activists and established democracy movements, was united by a common goal: the fall of Mubarak. Ez-Eldin says there was also a broad consensus over "bread, freedom and social justice" as goals of the "revolution of dignity." The opinion leaders of the revolution were without doubt fighting for a civil society, a secular state - as an alternative to the military state. "Such a state is naturally the opposite of a religious state such as the Muslim Brotherhood wants to bring about. But I am certain that the majority of ordinary people in this country have no interest in a religious state, and there is a growing concern among them that the role of religion in politics could increase - I call this the Egyptian formula. This cannot be enforced from above like in Turkey," ez-Eldin said. Muslim Brotherhood, freeloader of the revolution Although so far the Muslim Brotherhood has not promoted a discernibly Islamist program, distrust of the ruling Islamists is great in liberal and leftist groups. Many Tahrir activists feel that the Revolution has been stolen from them. If Egypt does not become a secular society, there could be further protest. Ziad al-Alimi, one of the leading activists of the Revolutionary Youth Movement, co-founder of the Egyptian Social Democratic Party and a member of parliament, welcomed the way Morsi clipped the military's wings, but he has great doubts about the ability to govern of Morsi's Party for Freedom and Justice, the political wing of the Muslim Brotherhood. "Because they have no program, they take refuge in religion as a political ideology. They want to transform God's word into political action, but that is impossible. And in this way they will not solve a single problem in this country," he said. Egyptians don't want an "Islamic renaissance" from President Morsi but workable solutions to the major social and economic problems of their country. And because the future of the entire democratic transformation of Egypt is being decided on just such social issues, al-Alimi sees two options for Egypt's future development: Either liberal and civil society parties succeed in reducing the influence of the Muslim Brotherhood through elections, or there'll be a second revolution bloodier than the first. But against all odds, Al-Alimi looks to the future with optimism: "I am convinced that within a decade we will arrive at a truly new political system. The requirements for this are that the civil parties who want a secular state join forces and do not let themselves be divided again. In addition, we have to create better basic living conditions for ordinary Egyptians."


Arab political upheaval opens prospects for western business partners Germany has done business in the Arab world for decades. But the current political changes in North Africa offers exceptional opportunities for German companies. The political upheaval in Tunisia and Egypt has already lastingly changed the face of northern Africa. And there are going to be many political changes in the region, according to Mohammed Halaiqah, head of the Jordanian parliament's International Affairs Committee. The state of affairs in Tunisia, Egypt or Yemen was not stable, Halaiqah said at a recent German-Arab Business Forum in Berlin. But nevertheless, economic relations with Germany would grow further. "I believe for some time business will be as usual," Halaiqah said. "We will still be a big importer of German goods. Germany has excelled in technology and quality. It is very active in the region." According to Halaiqah, the recent upheaval in the region would mean more business for western companies. "I'm sad to say this, but what has happened has brought destruction especially to the infrastructure and that definitely will open more opportunities for German companies and other companies from Europe," he said. Staying in the loop It's a difficult consideration for foreign firms. On the one side, the region boasts unstable political conditions. On the other side, there are quite enticing business opportunities. Trade volumes between Germany and Arab countries increased by 16.2 percent last year to 38.7 billion euros ($54.7 billion), according to figures by the Federal Statistics Office. German exports into the region rose by 17 percent to 29 billion euros.  Reconstruction projects in Iraq are a booming business The Arab world is a growing market. This year, this growth is estimated at five percent. Anyone who wants a part of it cannot pull out now, said Saeb Nahas, head of the Syrian company Nahas Enterprises. "It would be a big mistake if German companies did not continue their business in Syria because they will lose the market," Nahas said at the Forum. He noted that Syria, with a population of 22 million, was a major market. But its close ties to neighboring Iraq were also of significance. "Syrians are doing beautiful business in Iraq and can be helpful to the German companies as well for their Iraqi business," Nahas said - alluding to the fact that many German companies missed the ideal moment to get involved in the reconstruction of Iraq. Today, other countries are doing business there, and anyone who wants to get on board needs good contacts. Growth in the energy sector But it isn't just the Germans who need the Arab market. The Arab countries themselves rely on the help of foreign companies to stabilize their economies. "Create jobs" - that was a constant appeal in countries like Egypt and Tunisia during their revolutions. Thomas Bach, head of the Ghorfa Arab-German Chamber of Commerce and Industry, is campaigning for the German private sector to accompany the change in Arab countries. After all, the point is to build up a free-enterprise system and social market economy. Germany has expertise particularly in these areas which are currently in demand - and will continue to be, Bach said. "Education and vocational training is one of these topics," Bach said. "But in these countries it will also be about building up infrastructure and ensuring sustainable development for these societies. This also pertains to investments in the energy sector. Germany is also particularly suitable in this case as a world market leader in renewable energy to play a special role."  Germany can offer a lot in alternative energy technology  But peaceful solutions in the respective countries must be found quickly, he added. The process of transformation will not be simple, but rather long and will differ in the various Arab nations. Twenty-two countries belong to the Arab League. Egypt is different than Saudi Arabia and Syria again unlike Tunisia. That is why a lot will depend on German companies viewing each country individually. Personal ties count The German architecture office Albert Speer and Partner (AS&P;) in Frankfurt has designed buildings in Arab countries for decades, for example in Oman, Abu Dhabi, Kuwait and Saudi Arabia. The company will construct nine of the 12 soccer stadiums for the World Cup in Qatar in 2022. Managing partner Gerhard Brand said AS&P; was always open to other cultures and was one of the first German architects to dare to enter these countries and work there. "I think we secured a very high reputation through our projects, which led to requests from other Arab countries," Brand said. According to Brand, personal relationships and trust are the most important requirements for business relations in Arab countries. Though the development is generally somewhat tedious, the ties are then all the more friendly and lasting, he said. "We've been working with institutions in Saudi Arabia in part for over 30 years," Brand said. "If a president calls and says we have a new project, I don't have to talk about contracts but rather start working because I trust his word. I know that we'll be able to work it out later contractually. It's completely different in Germany and Europe. We have a very high level of trust in advance in the Arab world." In return, Arab partners expect resilient relations and stability from their German business partners - particularly in times of upheaval. Weighing the options For companies like architects AS&P;, the risks nonetheless have to be carefully weighed, said Brand. But three basic principles apply to all countries. First of all, the company doesn't send any employees to a country where one of its partners wouldn't work. "Secondly, in countries where we fear something could happen, we don't even try to make acquisitions," Brand said. "And the third point: when we're in a country, we maintain contact to our clients for as long as it's physically possible, but of course we don't endanger the lives of our staff." When a situation gets too dangerous, the company pulls out its staff, though it continues working on the project. "We continue to maintain contact, which today is possible electronically and when it stabilizes, then we are immediately there again," he said. AS&P; has pulled out of Libya, for example. In Egypt, though, the planners are continuing to work on a project in Alexandria which is currently on hold. The Egyptians assured the company that the project can move on in the next few weeks - possibly with new representatives, but with the existing contracts in effect. Author: Sabine Kinkartz / sac Editor: Rob Mudge


Uncensored: Muslim women speak about women's rights A new book "Usensurert" (Uncensored) by Norwegian journalist Birgitte C. Huitfeldt presents a look behind the veil of what it means to be a woman in the Muslim world. Jan Tomes talked to her about their concerns. The Middle East is usually written about as a place of wars, conflicts, and revolutions. But the biggest one - the battle for women's freedom and equality - is still to be fought, as shown in Birgitte C. Huitfeldt's latest book "Usensurert" (Uncensored), which was just released in Norway. Huitfeldt picked 10 prominent feminist figures from 10 Middle Eastern countries, including Egyptian women's rights advocate Nawal El Saadawi, Iranian lawyer and Nobel Peace Prize winner Shirin Ebadi, Saudi Ambassador Mehla Ahmed Talebna and investigative journalist Rana Husseini from Jordan. DW: What surprised me about the book was that the women you chose to interview, except for Mehla Ahmed Talebna, talked very little about Islam and Islamic fundamentalism. Why is that since the topic is essential to women's rights in the region? Birgitte C. Huitfeldt: Those women are uncensored in much of their daily work, but they still can't talk freely about social and gender topics in the context of religion and religious matters. So I kept the book focused on family structures, patriarchy, women's rights, and the laws that need to change to ensure equality for all women in the Middle East. I think a new generation of women must emerge in the Muslim world who will want to talk about Islam and challenge it. Hajer Sharief, a 24-year-old activist from Libya, represents that young generation. Do you sense some generational shifts in attitudes or means in fighting for women's rights in the region? Sharief is a child of this war - she experienced the civil war in Libya in 2011 as an adolescent - which shaped her to become an activist and a spokeswoman for peace. Sharief works for all the young people in her country by speaking up for them and encouraging them to rise together against wars and oppression and toward freedom, individual choice and peace. The way of working for better conditions for all young people is typical for Sharief's generation; she is fearless, practical, and optimistic. Read more: A woman's world in post-revolution Libya? On the other hand, Egyptian feminist Nawal El Saadawi told you that she wouldn't participate in the book if you also interviewed a woman from Israel. Do disputes between nations and religions paralyze women in the Middle East to come together and fight together? She told me that during our first meeting in Cairo in 2014, so I asked her if she could send me a few lines outlining her views concerning this matter, but she never replied. Her answer might have been interesting, but her silence is just as well. The women who want to silence their neighbors and sisters create fear. That is not the feminism we would like to develop in democratic societies; this is applied patriarchy between sovereign women. Permalink http://p.dw.com/p/2fXSd Read more: Egypt's women find their voice against sexual harassment How are women perceived in the contemporary Middle Eastern societies? From the talks, it was interesting for me to learn how much old structures still rule the Middle Eastern societies today, and how difficult it is to distinguish between Islamic fundamentalism and everyday oppressing family codes or patriarchal suppression of women. I am talking here about honor-related violence in the name of Islam but also about the notion that women are men's property. There is still a long way to change women's position and status within the patriarchal Muslim family. Generally, the more poverty, war, and weapons are present in the country, the more oppression and violence are applied against women. That is not exclusive to the Middle East, however. Women are the weakest targets when they do not have their independence, and in the Muslim family, girls learn that they are worthy only the half of their brother. The interview with Canan Arin is shocking in many ways: How is it possible that Turkey, which has applied to accede the EU, sentences a woman for standing for women's rights and against marriages with girls who are minors,  or honor killings, which are still present in the country? The way Turkey treats their women is nothing but a shame! Turkey is now competing with the most backward countries in the Middle East. President Erdogan is breaking every obliged social and democratic rule of human dignity and rights by censorship and social punishment. He silences everything and everybody opposing him and his regime. But at the same time, we see that a new generation of young women are making their ways out of this world through social media and are tearing down the patriarchal wall by not tolerating to be silenced and stigmatized as "the other gender." Does the Western society - and the contemporary Western feminism in particular - understand Middle Eastern women and their needs? You need to be more than a feminist to be able to understand the Arab world and the real needs of the Middle Eastern women, and I don't think Western feminism has the urge and the knowledge to do so. The imperialistic narrative on Middle Eastern women is still well alive in 2017, restricting communications between "us" and "them" instead of broadening it. I think that we all have to step out of our cocoons of good intentions wanting to change other women and their way of living to become more like us. Instead, we have to get into a dialogue with them, and understand what our differences are, and how they have emerged. We, Western feminists, have to change our mindset toward Middle Eastern women, which is a challenging task for all of us.


International Media Studies: Publication on the Arab Spring The newly published proceedings of the international Media Dialogue 2012 include an essay by Eira Martens on the role of social media during the Egyptian revolution. Martens is a graduate of the IMS program. Every year DW Akademie invites leading academics and media experts to the interdisciplinary Media Dialogue held in Bonn. The 2012 symposium focused on "The Arab World - The Role of Media in the Arab Spring's Transformation Process". The proceedings have now been published and include an essay by Eira Martens. She researched the role of social media during the upheavals in Egypt and says their role is often overstated. Edition International Media Studies You explored the role of social media in the Egyptian revolution. It is safe to say that Twitter and Facebook helped topple president Hosni Mubarak after he had been in power for 30 years? Yes. My research results show that Twitter and Facebook played a significant role in mobilizing protesters, and particularly Facebook helped accelerate the process. Still, that doesn't necessarily mean that the revolution would not have happened without these online platforms. Most of the social media activists I interviewed believed that it would have possibly taken just a few more years to overthrow the government. The virtual networks enabled the initially small protest movement to grow very quickly, especially in the year preceding the 18 day mass protests in January and February 2011. The Arab Social Media Report illustrates this growth exceptionally well.  How does your research differ from numerous other studies on the subject? Over the past few years there's been a great deal of hype around the role of social media in political transformation processes. Cyberoptimists and social media sceptics have for years been debating "Twitter revolutions" and "Facebook effects", often in a very speculative way. In light of this I wanted to compile and analyze my own empirical data on the concrete roles social media platforms played in Egypt's revolution. Previous studies indicate a need for studies on collective identity formation and organization mechanisms. I wanted to dig deeper and find out why and how people used social media to mobilize protesters in a country like Egypt.  What effect did social media have in Egypt in terms of forming a collective identity? More than anything, photos and videos helped develop a collective identity, or more precisely, helped develop a form of solidarity. Images of police brutality and police assaults distributed on Facebook and other platforms such as YouTube and Flickr made people more willing to take to the streets and risk injury or even death. These images not only made people angrier but also lowered their threshold of fear. Overall, social media networks made people feel they were part of a bigger, collective protest movement. As a result, they dared to leave the online world and enter the offline world, to go out onto the streets and into public spaces. The Egyptian protesters used numerous social media platforms but primarily Twitter and Facebook. Were these used in different ways? It's important to look at that because the technical aspect alone means that different platforms are used for different purposes. While Facebook was used for exchanging huge amounts of audiovisual content and creating networks and discussion groups, Twitter was primarily used for logistics. People on the streets could use Twitter to quickly exchange information about things that were happening at that moment. That way, protesters could immediately react and evade attacks by security forces, for example, or bypass blockades. While the general population used Facebook, it was primarily committed activists who used Twitter within and outside Egypt.  Did the protest movement have leaders? Opinions differ on this. Although the people I interviewed could be considered central figures in the movement they didn't see themselves that way. If anything, they were modest and preferred to stay in the background. But the leadership aspect is a controversial one. Some believe that the protest movement - at least on the Internet - didn't need leaders and that the egalitarian forms of organization and communication of Facebook groups are decisive characteristics of social media. Others believe that there were indeed "leadership figures" although they were often created and highly stylized by the mass media. My interview partners mentioned famous bloggers as well as famous writers including the Egyptian author Alaa Al-Aswani, who was also a spokesperson for the Kefaya movement.  How would you describe the relationship between social media and traditional media in Egypt? The new and traditional media definitely interacted during the protests. Instead of creating their own content, traditional media, whether Egyptian or foreign, could fall back on user-generated - or protester-generated - content. At the same time, the impact of social media relied on television and newspapers because many people had no or little access to the Internet. There was a five-day Internet blackout during the protests and its impact can be interpreted in two ways. On the one hand, protesters continued to go out on the streets regardless; on the other hand, many believe that the social media blackout enraged people to the extent that they went out and protested in ever-increasing numbers.   Eira Martens is a recent graduate of DW Akademie's International Media Studies master's program. After completing her degree in Social and Economic Sciences Martens worked for various NGOs and media organizations in Germany, Australia, South East Asia and Latin America. Martens is currently a DW Akademie research assistant and continues to contribute to academic research relating to the field of media development.


Egyptian military agrees to new cabinet as protesters turn up the heat Egypt's ruling military council has agreed to form a new government that will prepare a presidential election to be held before next July. But the concessions were swiftly rejected by protesters in central Cairo. Protesters continued to do battle with security forces in Cairo on Wednesday, despite the ruling military authority's pledge to speed up the transfer to democratic rule. The UN High Commissioner for Human Rights, Navi Pillay, called for an independent probe into the killing of demonstrators by Egyptian security forces. At least 38 people have been killed in the clashes in recent days, according to the Elnadeem Center, an Egyptian rights group. The Egyptian Health Ministry has reported 35 deaths. "I urge the Egyptian authorities to end the clearly excessive use of force against protesters in Tahrir Square and elsewhere in the country, including the apparent improper use of tear gas, rubber bullets, and ammunition," said Pillay. Egypt's Supreme Council of the Armed Forces (SCAF) on Tuesday agreed to the formation of a national salvation government and to hand power to a civilian authority by July, instead of late 2012 or early 2013, as originally planned. But the concessions failed to convince thousands of people gathered in central Cairo's Tahrir Square, who demanded an immediate end to military rule. The square was the epicenter of the protests that toppled former president Hosni Mubarak in February. Protesters chanted "leave, leave," referring to the head of the ruling SCAF military council, Field Marshal Mohammed Hussein Tantawi. The Egyptian military is ready to cede power, says Tantawi Tantawi announced after an all-party meeting with politicians that the military was ready to cede power sooner than originally planned through a referendum. "The Armed Forces do not seek power and are ready to leave power immediately through the holding of a popular referendum if necessary," Tantawi said in a televised address. Protesters chanted their rejection of the speech by Tantawi, calling for the installation of a civilian government. Military moves to mollify dissent Selim al-Awwa, a presidential hopeful who attended the meeting, said, "it was agreed to form a government of national salvation, which would implement the goals of the revolution." Awwa also said it was agreed that "power would be handed over to an elected civilian president no later than the end of June 2012." Egypt's ruling military council is facing its worst crisis since it stepped in to replace Mubarak in February. With little success, it has been trying to contain the growing protests with violence. The political leaders who attended Tuesday's discussions in Cairo said a parliamentary election, scheduled to begin on November 28, would go ahead as planned, despite the latest violence. Egyptians want democracy sooner rather than later Participants in the talks also said that controversial proposals put forward by the outgoing cabinet, which would have permanently shielded the military from civilian oversight under a new constitution, had been dropped. On Monday, the military-appointed interim civilian government tendered its resignation in the wake of protests, but the SCAF had initially refused to accept it. It was also announced that all people detained during the recent clashes would be released. International criticism The United States, meanwhile, is losing its patience with Egypt's military rulers. The Obama administration ratcheted up its criticism on Tuesday, blaming the military for the new wave of violence. State Department spokeswoman, Victoria Nuland, condemned the police for using excessive force and urged maximum restraint and discipline. She did, however, praise the military for pledging to hold elections as planned and hand back power to civilians. Germany called on Wednesday for an end to political violence, with Chancellor Angela Merkel's spokesman saying Egypt's military rulers needed to pay attention to the protesters' demands. "In the new Egypt, which intends to be free and democratic, there can be no place for repression and violence against peaceful demonstrators," government spokesman Steffen Seibert said.  Author: Gregg Benzow, David Levitz, Joanna Impey, Spencer Kimball (dpa, AFP, Reuters, AP) Editor: Michael Lawton


Readers add their voices to debate on Libya Should a no-fly zone be created? Or should the international community render aid? Or simply look the other way? Our readers wrote in with their opinions. The following comments reflect the views of DW-WORLD.DE readers. DW-WORLD.DE reserves the right to edit for length and appropriateness of content. 

Gadhafi warns of 'bloody war' in Libya as fighting continues 
I sure hope the US doesn't become involved in Libya. But, being that they are ruled by a dictator and there are numerous human rights violations, I wouldn't be surprised if we do. The whole Middle East is a boiling cauldron. I think they should sort out their own problems, but can't, and too many people are already suffering as a result. -- Eddie, US 

The West can't say no if Libyans call for a no-fly zone 
I don't think a "no-fly zone" would be a good idea. Outside support to the opposition, such as supplies, advance warning systems and military weapons with training would be the best approach. Any invasion of the country by military force would be criticized by many, including some people in Libya. -- Garry, Canada 

Libyan no-fly zone plans gather momentum 
It will be total madness if the world chooses to attack Libya. How could the West choose to attack only one faction? Libya is a sovereign country and should be left to deal with its internal affairs. -- Harruna, Ghana 

Libyan rebels face new attacks by Gadhafi forces 
When people realize their democratic rights, nothing can stop them - not even bullets. Following the dramatic removal of both the Tunisian and Egyptian dictators, Gadhafi will be fried in the same pan, as the working and poor masses seek to remove repressive regimes out and forever. -- Mutua, Kenya 

Analysts remain skeptical about plans for a no-fly zone 
No, this strategy did not work well in Iraq and Libya is a much larger country. Also, Gadhafi might use this to his own advantage, by blaming the West, and the US in particular, for making war against the Libyan people thereby gaining a propaganda victory. -- G., Canada 

Germany

advocates tougher Libya sanctions amid escalating violence 
It's interesting that as long as a dictator does what the mighty dictator demands, it's okay, but as soon as they get older, less adaptable, no longer needed, out they go, and others jump on the bandwagon, like with Iraq, Egypt and now Libya. Out with the old, in with the new. It's all for the greed of oil. -- Marta, US 
First, I would like to congratulate world leaders for their great concern for Libya and other African countries. These leaders are working hard to make sure the situation in Libya gets back to normal and the suffering of Libyans stops. I am asking them to take actions and impose tougher sanctions to Moammar Gadhafi to rescue the lives of innocent people in Libya. I am afraid more delay will cost more lives. I also condemn the silence of African leaders, to them it's like there is nothing happening. They have been all quiet. Their silence proves to the world that most African rulers got to power through non-democratic and unfair elections. I call upon African leaders to wake up, open their eyes and face reality, otherwise, what is in Libya will soon happen in their countries. It has happened in Tunisia and Egypt, now we see it in Libya. They have to change. -- Emmanuel, Tanzania 
What gives Germany the right to advocate anything? What Germany are you talking about? Germany is still an occupied country! Just because Germany likes foreign occupation (65 years is not enough?) it thinks that other nations love that too? -- Judutarrak, US 
It is becoming more and more imperative for Germany to refrain from giving advice in international matters, such as North Africa and others. Germany's forte is education, innovation and quality of production, as well as basic research from the deep oceans to outer space through all related sciences. Germany must understand that almost all problems popping up now are the consequence of colonialism, slavery and globalization, meaning exploitation through whatever means with the intention for future democracies under a military umbrella. -- HRF, Antigua and Barbuda 
Compiled by Stuart Tiffen
Editor: Michael Lawton Gadhafi warns of 'bloody war' in Libya as fighting continues 
I sure hope the US doesn't become involved in Libya. But, being that they are ruled by a dictator and there are numerous human rights violations, I wouldn't be surprised if we do. The whole Middle East is a boiling cauldron. I think they should sort out their own problems, but can't, and too many people are already suffering as a result. -- Eddie, US 

The West can't say no if Libyans call for a no-fly zone 
I don't think a "no-fly zone" would be a good idea. Outside support to the opposition, such as supplies, advance warning systems and military weapons with training would be the best approach. Any invasion of the country by military force would be criticized by many, including some people in Libya. -- Garry, Canada 

Libyan no-fly zone plans gather momentum 
It will be total madness if the world chooses to attack Libya. How could the West choose to attack only one faction? Libya is a sovereign country and should be left to deal with its internal affairs. -- Harruna, Ghana 

Libyan rebels face new attacks by Gadhafi forces 
When people realize their democratic rights, nothing can stop them - not even bullets. Following the dramatic removal of both the Tunisian and Egyptian dictators, Gadhafi will be fried in the same pan, as the working and poor masses seek to remove repressive regimes out and forever. -- Mutua, Kenya 

Analysts remain skeptical about plans for a no-fly zone 
No, this strategy did not work well in Iraq and Libya is a much larger country. Also, Gadhafi might use this to his own advantage, by blaming the West, and the US in particular, for making war against the Libyan people thereby gaining a propaganda victory. -- G., Canada 

Germany

advocates tougher Libya sanctions amid escalating violence 
It's interesting that as long as a dictator does what the mighty dictator demands, it's okay, but as soon as they get older, less adaptable, no longer needed, out they go, and others jump on the bandwagon, like with Iraq, Egypt and now Libya. Out with the old, in with the new. It's all for the greed of oil. -- Marta, US 
First, I would like to congratulate world leaders for their great concern for Libya and other African countries. These leaders are working hard to make sure the situation in Libya gets back to normal and the suffering of Libyans stops. I am asking them to take actions and impose tougher sanctions to Moammar Gadhafi to rescue the lives of innocent people in Libya. I am afraid more delay will cost more lives. I also condemn the silence of African leaders, to them it's like there is nothing happening. They have been all quiet. Their silence proves to the world that most African rulers got to power through non-democratic and unfair elections. I call upon African leaders to wake up, open their eyes and face reality, otherwise, what is in Libya will soon happen in their countries. It has happened in Tunisia and Egypt, now we see it in Libya. They have to change. -- Emmanuel, Tanzania 
What gives Germany the right to advocate anything? What Germany are you talking about? Germany is still an occupied country! Just because Germany likes foreign occupation (65 years is not enough?) it thinks that other nations love that too? -- Judutarrak, US 
It is becoming more and more imperative for Germany to refrain from giving advice in international matters, such as North Africa and others. Germany's forte is education, innovation and quality of production, as well as basic research from the deep oceans to outer space through all related sciences. Germany must understand that almost all problems popping up now are the consequence of colonialism, slavery and globalization, meaning exploitation through whatever means with the intention for future democracies under a military umbrella. -- HRF, Antigua and Barbuda 
Compiled by Stuart Tiffen
Editor: Michael Lawton I sure hope the US doesn't become involved in Libya. But, being that they are ruled by a dictator and there are numerous human rights violations, I wouldn't be surprised if we do. The whole Middle East is a boiling cauldron. I think they should sort out their own problems, but can't, and too many people are already suffering as a result. -- Eddie, US 

The West can't say no if Libyans call for a no-fly zone 
I don't think a "no-fly zone" would be a good idea. Outside support to the opposition, such as supplies, advance warning systems and military weapons with training would be the best approach. Any invasion of the country by military force would be criticized by many, including some people in Libya. -- Garry, Canada 

Libyan no-fly zone plans gather momentum 
It will be total madness if the world chooses to attack Libya. How could the West choose to attack only one faction? Libya is a sovereign country and should be left to deal with its internal affairs. -- Harruna, Ghana 

Libyan rebels face new attacks by Gadhafi forces 
When people realize their democratic rights, nothing can stop them - not even bullets. Following the dramatic removal of both the Tunisian and Egyptian dictators, Gadhafi will be fried in the same pan, as the working and poor masses seek to remove repressive regimes out and forever. -- Mutua, Kenya 

Analysts remain skeptical about plans for a no-fly zone 
No, this strategy did not work well in Iraq and Libya is a much larger country. Also, Gadhafi might use this to his own advantage, by blaming the West, and the US in particular, for making war against the Libyan people thereby gaining a propaganda victory. -- G., Canada 

Germany

advocates tougher Libya sanctions amid escalating violence 
It's interesting that as long as a dictator does what the mighty dictator demands, it's okay, but as soon as they get older, less adaptable, no longer needed, out they go, and others jump on the bandwagon, like with Iraq, Egypt and now Libya. Out with the old, in with the new. It's all for the greed of oil. -- Marta, US 
First, I would like to congratulate world leaders for their great concern for Libya and other African countries. These leaders are working hard to make sure the situation in Libya gets back to normal and the suffering of Libyans stops. I am asking them to take actions and impose tougher sanctions to Moammar Gadhafi to rescue the lives of innocent people in Libya. I am afraid more delay will cost more lives. I also condemn the silence of African leaders, to them it's like there is nothing happening. They have been all quiet. Their silence proves to the world that most African rulers got to power through non-democratic and unfair elections. I call upon African leaders to wake up, open their eyes and face reality, otherwise, what is in Libya will soon happen in their countries. It has happened in Tunisia and Egypt, now we see it in Libya. They have to change. -- Emmanuel, Tanzania 
What gives Germany the right to advocate anything? What Germany are you talking about? Germany is still an occupied country! Just because Germany likes foreign occupation (65 years is not enough?) it thinks that other nations love that too? -- Judutarrak, US 
It is becoming more and more imperative for Germany to refrain from giving advice in international matters, such as North Africa and others. Germany's forte is education, innovation and quality of production, as well as basic research from the deep oceans to outer space through all related sciences. Germany must understand that almost all problems popping up now are the consequence of colonialism, slavery and globalization, meaning exploitation through whatever means with the intention for future democracies under a military umbrella. -- HRF, Antigua and Barbuda 
Compiled by Stuart Tiffen
Editor: Michael Lawton The West can't say no if Libyans call for a no-fly zone 
I don't think a "no-fly zone" would be a good idea. Outside support to the opposition, such as supplies, advance warning systems and military weapons with training would be the best approach. Any invasion of the country by military force would be criticized by many, including some people in Libya. -- Garry, Canada 

Libyan no-fly zone plans gather momentum 
It will be total madness if the world chooses to attack Libya. How could the West choose to attack only one faction? Libya is a sovereign country and should be left to deal with its internal affairs. -- Harruna, Ghana 

Libyan rebels face new attacks by Gadhafi forces 
When people realize their democratic rights, nothing can stop them - not even bullets. Following the dramatic removal of both the Tunisian and Egyptian dictators, Gadhafi will be fried in the same pan, as the working and poor masses seek to remove repressive regimes out and forever. -- Mutua, Kenya 

Analysts remain skeptical about plans for a no-fly zone 
No, this strategy did not work well in Iraq and Libya is a much larger country. Also, Gadhafi might use this to his own advantage, by blaming the West, and the US in particular, for making war against the Libyan people thereby gaining a propaganda victory. -- G., Canada 

Germany

advocates tougher Libya sanctions amid escalating violence 
It's interesting that as long as a dictator does what the mighty dictator demands, it's okay, but as soon as they get older, less adaptable, no longer needed, out they go, and others jump on the bandwagon, like with Iraq, Egypt and now Libya. Out with the old, in with the new. It's all for the greed of oil. -- Marta, US 
First, I would like to congratulate world leaders for their great concern for Libya and other African countries. These leaders are working hard to make sure the situation in Libya gets back to normal and the suffering of Libyans stops. I am asking them to take actions and impose tougher sanctions to Moammar Gadhafi to rescue the lives of innocent people in Libya. I am afraid more delay will cost more lives. I also condemn the silence of African leaders, to them it's like there is nothing happening. They have been all quiet. Their silence proves to the world that most African rulers got to power through non-democratic and unfair elections. I call upon African leaders to wake up, open their eyes and face reality, otherwise, what is in Libya will soon happen in their countries. It has happened in Tunisia and Egypt, now we see it in Libya. They have to change. -- Emmanuel, Tanzania 
What gives Germany the right to advocate anything? What Germany are you talking about? Germany is still an occupied country! Just because Germany likes foreign occupation (65 years is not enough?) it thinks that other nations love that too? -- Judutarrak, US 
It is becoming more and more imperative for Germany to refrain from giving advice in international matters, such as North Africa and others. Germany's forte is education, innovation and quality of production, as well as basic research from the deep oceans to outer space through all related sciences. Germany must understand that almost all problems popping up now are the consequence of colonialism, slavery and globalization, meaning exploitation through whatever means with the intention for future democracies under a military umbrella. -- HRF, Antigua and Barbuda 
Compiled by Stuart Tiffen
Editor: Michael Lawton I don't think a "no-fly zone" would be a good idea. Outside support to the opposition, such as supplies, advance warning systems and military weapons with training would be the best approach. Any invasion of the country by military force would be criticized by many, including some people in Libya. -- Garry, Canada 

Libyan no-fly zone plans gather momentum 
It will be total madness if the world chooses to attack Libya. How could the West choose to attack only one faction? Libya is a sovereign country and should be left to deal with its internal affairs. -- Harruna, Ghana 

Libyan rebels face new attacks by Gadhafi forces 
When people realize their democratic rights, nothing can stop them - not even bullets. Following the dramatic removal of both the Tunisian and Egyptian dictators, Gadhafi will be fried in the same pan, as the working and poor masses seek to remove repressive regimes out and forever. -- Mutua, Kenya 

Analysts remain skeptical about plans for a no-fly zone 
No, this strategy did not work well in Iraq and Libya is a much larger country. Also, Gadhafi might use this to his own advantage, by blaming the West, and the US in particular, for making war against the Libyan people thereby gaining a propaganda victory. -- G., Canada 

Germany

advocates tougher Libya sanctions amid escalating violence 
It's interesting that as long as a dictator does what the mighty dictator demands, it's okay, but as soon as they get older, less adaptable, no longer needed, out they go, and others jump on the bandwagon, like with Iraq, Egypt and now Libya. Out with the old, in with the new. It's all for the greed of oil. -- Marta, US 
First, I would like to congratulate world leaders for their great concern for Libya and other African countries. These leaders are working hard to make sure the situation in Libya gets back to normal and the suffering of Libyans stops. I am asking them to take actions and impose tougher sanctions to Moammar Gadhafi to rescue the lives of innocent people in Libya. I am afraid more delay will cost more lives. I also condemn the silence of African leaders, to them it's like there is nothing happening. They have been all quiet. Their silence proves to the world that most African rulers got to power through non-democratic and unfair elections. I call upon African leaders to wake up, open their eyes and face reality, otherwise, what is in Libya will soon happen in their countries. It has happened in Tunisia and Egypt, now we see it in Libya. They have to change. -- Emmanuel, Tanzania 
What gives Germany the right to advocate anything? What Germany are you talking about? Germany is still an occupied country! Just because Germany likes foreign occupation (65 years is not enough?) it thinks that other nations love that too? -- Judutarrak, US 
It is becoming more and more imperative for Germany to refrain from giving advice in international matters, such as North Africa and others. Germany's forte is education, innovation and quality of production, as well as basic research from the deep oceans to outer space through all related sciences. Germany must understand that almost all problems popping up now are the consequence of colonialism, slavery and globalization, meaning exploitation through whatever means with the intention for future democracies under a military umbrella. -- HRF, Antigua and Barbuda 
Compiled by Stuart Tiffen
Editor: Michael Lawton Libyan no-fly zone plans gather momentum 
It will be total madness if the world chooses to attack Libya. How could the West choose to attack only one faction? Libya is a sovereign country and should be left to deal with its internal affairs. -- Harruna, Ghana 

Libyan rebels face new attacks by Gadhafi forces 
When people realize their democratic rights, nothing can stop them - not even bullets. Following the dramatic removal of both the Tunisian and Egyptian dictators, Gadhafi will be fried in the same pan, as the working and poor masses seek to remove repressive regimes out and forever. -- Mutua, Kenya 

Analysts remain skeptical about plans for a no-fly zone 
No, this strategy did not work well in Iraq and Libya is a much larger country. Also, Gadhafi might use this to his own advantage, by blaming the West, and the US in particular, for making war against the Libyan people thereby gaining a propaganda victory. -- G., Canada 

Germany

advocates tougher Libya sanctions amid escalating violence 
It's interesting that as long as a dictator does what the mighty dictator demands, it's okay, but as soon as they get older, less adaptable, no longer needed, out they go, and others jump on the bandwagon, like with Iraq, Egypt and now Libya. Out with the old, in with the new. It's all for the greed of oil. -- Marta, US 
First, I would like to congratulate world leaders for their great concern for Libya and other African countries. These leaders are working hard to make sure the situation in Libya gets back to normal and the suffering of Libyans stops. I am asking them to take actions and impose tougher sanctions to Moammar Gadhafi to rescue the lives of innocent people in Libya. I am afraid more delay will cost more lives. I also condemn the silence of African leaders, to them it's like there is nothing happening. They have been all quiet. Their silence proves to the world that most African rulers got to power through non-democratic and unfair elections. I call upon African leaders to wake up, open their eyes and face reality, otherwise, what is in Libya will soon happen in their countries. It has happened in Tunisia and Egypt, now we see it in Libya. They have to change. -- Emmanuel, Tanzania 
What gives Germany the right to advocate anything? What Germany are you talking about? Germany is still an occupied country! Just because Germany likes foreign occupation (65 years is not enough?) it thinks that other nations love that too? -- Judutarrak, US 
It is becoming more and more imperative for Germany to refrain from giving advice in international matters, such as North Africa and others. Germany's forte is education, innovation and quality of production, as well as basic research from the deep oceans to outer space through all related sciences. Germany must understand that almost all problems popping up now are the consequence of colonialism, slavery and globalization, meaning exploitation through whatever means with the intention for future democracies under a military umbrella. -- HRF, Antigua and Barbuda 
Compiled by Stuart Tiffen
Editor: Michael Lawton It will be total madness if the world chooses to attack Libya. How could the West choose to attack only one faction? Libya is a sovereign country and should be left to deal with its internal affairs. -- Harruna, Ghana 

Libyan rebels face new attacks by Gadhafi forces 
When people realize their democratic rights, nothing can stop them - not even bullets. Following the dramatic removal of both the Tunisian and Egyptian dictators, Gadhafi will be fried in the same pan, as the working and poor masses seek to remove repressive regimes out and forever. -- Mutua, Kenya 

Analysts remain skeptical about plans for a no-fly zone 
No, this strategy did not work well in Iraq and Libya is a much larger country. Also, Gadhafi might use this to his own advantage, by blaming the West, and the US in particular, for making war against the Libyan people thereby gaining a propaganda victory. -- G., Canada 

Germany

advocates tougher Libya sanctions amid escalating violence 
It's interesting that as long as a dictator does what the mighty dictator demands, it's okay, but as soon as they get older, less adaptable, no longer needed, out they go, and others jump on the bandwagon, like with Iraq, Egypt and now Libya. Out with the old, in with the new. It's all for the greed of oil. -- Marta, US 
First, I would like to congratulate world leaders for their great concern for Libya and other African countries. These leaders are working hard to make sure the situation in Libya gets back to normal and the suffering of Libyans stops. I am asking them to take actions and impose tougher sanctions to Moammar Gadhafi to rescue the lives of innocent people in Libya. I am afraid more delay will cost more lives. I also condemn the silence of African leaders, to them it's like there is nothing happening. They have been all quiet. Their silence proves to the world that most African rulers got to power through non-democratic and unfair elections. I call upon African leaders to wake up, open their eyes and face reality, otherwise, what is in Libya will soon happen in their countries. It has happened in Tunisia and Egypt, now we see it in Libya. They have to change. -- Emmanuel, Tanzania 
What gives Germany the right to advocate anything? What Germany are you talking about? Germany is still an occupied country! Just because Germany likes foreign occupation (65 years is not enough?) it thinks that other nations love that too? -- Judutarrak, US 
It is becoming more and more imperative for Germany to refrain from giving advice in international matters, such as North Africa and others. Germany's forte is education, innovation and quality of production, as well as basic research from the deep oceans to outer space through all related sciences. Germany must understand that almost all problems popping up now are the consequence of colonialism, slavery and globalization, meaning exploitation through whatever means with the intention for future democracies under a military umbrella. -- HRF, Antigua and Barbuda 
Compiled by Stuart Tiffen
Editor: Michael Lawton Libyan rebels face new attacks by Gadhafi forces 
When people realize their democratic rights, nothing can stop them - not even bullets. Following the dramatic removal of both the Tunisian and Egyptian dictators, Gadhafi will be fried in the same pan, as the working and poor masses seek to remove repressive regimes out and forever. -- Mutua, Kenya 

Analysts remain skeptical about plans for a no-fly zone 
No, this strategy did not work well in Iraq and Libya is a much larger country. Also, Gadhafi might use this to his own advantage, by blaming the West, and the US in particular, for making war against the Libyan people thereby gaining a propaganda victory. -- G., Canada 

Germany

advocates tougher Libya sanctions amid escalating violence 
It's interesting that as long as a dictator does what the mighty dictator demands, it's okay, but as soon as they get older, less adaptable, no longer needed, out they go, and others jump on the bandwagon, like with Iraq, Egypt and now Libya. Out with the old, in with the new. It's all for the greed of oil. -- Marta, US 
First, I would like to congratulate world leaders for their great concern for Libya and other African countries. These leaders are working hard to make sure the situation in Libya gets back to normal and the suffering of Libyans stops. I am asking them to take actions and impose tougher sanctions to Moammar Gadhafi to rescue the lives of innocent people in Libya. I am afraid more delay will cost more lives. I also condemn the silence of African leaders, to them it's like there is nothing happening. They have been all quiet. Their silence proves to the world that most African rulers got to power through non-democratic and unfair elections. I call upon African leaders to wake up, open their eyes and face reality, otherwise, what is in Libya will soon happen in their countries. It has happened in Tunisia and Egypt, now we see it in Libya. They have to change. -- Emmanuel, Tanzania 
What gives Germany the right to advocate anything? What Germany are you talking about? Germany is still an occupied country! Just because Germany likes foreign occupation (65 years is not enough?) it thinks that other nations love that too? -- Judutarrak, US 
It is becoming more and more imperative for Germany to refrain from giving advice in international matters, such as North Africa and others. Germany's forte is education, innovation and quality of production, as well as basic research from the deep oceans to outer space through all related sciences. Germany must understand that almost all problems popping up now are the consequence of colonialism, slavery and globalization, meaning exploitation through whatever means with the intention for future democracies under a military umbrella. -- HRF, Antigua and Barbuda 
Compiled by Stuart Tiffen
Editor: Michael Lawton When people realize their democratic rights, nothing can stop them - not even bullets. Following the dramatic removal of both the Tunisian and Egyptian dictators, Gadhafi will be fried in the same pan, as the working and poor masses seek to remove repressive regimes out and forever. -- Mutua, Kenya 

Analysts remain skeptical about plans for a no-fly zone 
No, this strategy did not work well in Iraq and Libya is a much larger country. Also, Gadhafi might use this to his own advantage, by blaming the West, and the US in particular, for making war against the Libyan people thereby gaining a propaganda victory. -- G., Canada 

Germany

advocates tougher Libya sanctions amid escalating violence 
It's interesting that as long as a dictator does what the mighty dictator demands, it's okay, but as soon as they get older, less adaptable, no longer needed, out they go, and others jump on the bandwagon, like with Iraq, Egypt and now Libya. Out with the old, in with the new. It's all for the greed of oil. -- Marta, US 
First, I would like to congratulate world leaders for their great concern for Libya and other African countries. These leaders are working hard to make sure the situation in Libya gets back to normal and the suffering of Libyans stops. I am asking them to take actions and impose tougher sanctions to Moammar Gadhafi to rescue the lives of innocent people in Libya. I am afraid more delay will cost more lives. I also condemn the silence of African leaders, to them it's like there is nothing happening. They have been all quiet. Their silence proves to the world that most African rulers got to power through non-democratic and unfair elections. I call upon African leaders to wake up, open their eyes and face reality, otherwise, what is in Libya will soon happen in their countries. It has happened in Tunisia and Egypt, now we see it in Libya. They have to change. -- Emmanuel, Tanzania 
What gives Germany the right to advocate anything? What Germany are you talking about? Germany is still an occupied country! Just because Germany likes foreign occupation (65 years is not enough?) it thinks that other nations love that too? -- Judutarrak, US 
It is becoming more and more imperative for Germany to refrain from giving advice in international matters, such as North Africa and others. Germany's forte is education, innovation and quality of production, as well as basic research from the deep oceans to outer space through all related sciences. Germany must understand that almost all problems popping up now are the consequence of colonialism, slavery and globalization, meaning exploitation through whatever means with the intention for future democracies under a military umbrella. -- HRF, Antigua and Barbuda 
Compiled by Stuart Tiffen
Editor: Michael Lawton Analysts remain skeptical about plans for a no-fly zone 
No, this strategy did not work well in Iraq and Libya is a much larger country. Also, Gadhafi might use this to his own advantage, by blaming the West, and the US in particular, for making war against the Libyan people thereby gaining a propaganda victory. -- G., Canada 

Germany

advocates tougher Libya sanctions amid escalating violence 
It's interesting that as long as a dictator does what the mighty dictator demands, it's okay, but as soon as they get older, less adaptable, no longer needed, out they go, and others jump on the bandwagon, like with Iraq, Egypt and now Libya. Out with the old, in with the new. It's all for the greed of oil. -- Marta, US 
First, I would like to congratulate world leaders for their great concern for Libya and other African countries. These leaders are working hard to make sure the situation in Libya gets back to normal and the suffering of Libyans stops. I am asking them to take actions and impose tougher sanctions to Moammar Gadhafi to rescue the lives of innocent people in Libya. I am afraid more delay will cost more lives. I also condemn the silence of African leaders, to them it's like there is nothing happening. They have been all quiet. Their silence proves to the world that most African rulers got to power through non-democratic and unfair elections. I call upon African leaders to wake up, open their eyes and face reality, otherwise, what is in Libya will soon happen in their countries. It has happened in Tunisia and Egypt, now we see it in Libya. They have to change. -- Emmanuel, Tanzania 
What gives Germany the right to advocate anything? What Germany are you talking about? Germany is still an occupied country! Just because Germany likes foreign occupation (65 years is not enough?) it thinks that other nations love that too? -- Judutarrak, US 
It is becoming more and more imperative for Germany to refrain from giving advice in international matters, such as North Africa and others. Germany's forte is education, innovation and quality of production, as well as basic research from the deep oceans to outer space through all related sciences. Germany must understand that almost all problems popping up now are the consequence of colonialism, slavery and globalization, meaning exploitation through whatever means with the intention for future democracies under a military umbrella. -- HRF, Antigua and Barbuda 
Compiled by Stuart Tiffen
Editor: Michael Lawton No, this strategy did not work well in Iraq and Libya is a much larger country. Also, Gadhafi might use this to his own advantage, by blaming the West, and the US in particular, for making war against the Libyan people thereby gaining a propaganda victory. -- G., Canada 

Germany

advocates tougher Libya sanctions amid escalating violence 
It's interesting that as long as a dictator does what the mighty dictator demands, it's okay, but as soon as they get older, less adaptable, no longer needed, out they go, and others jump on the bandwagon, like with Iraq, Egypt and now Libya. Out with the old, in with the new. It's all for the greed of oil. -- Marta, US 
First, I would like to congratulate world leaders for their great concern for Libya and other African countries. These leaders are working hard to make sure the situation in Libya gets back to normal and the suffering of Libyans stops. I am asking them to take actions and impose tougher sanctions to Moammar Gadhafi to rescue the lives of innocent people in Libya. I am afraid more delay will cost more lives. I also condemn the silence of African leaders, to them it's like there is nothing happening. They have been all quiet. Their silence proves to the world that most African rulers got to power through non-democratic and unfair elections. I call upon African leaders to wake up, open their eyes and face reality, otherwise, what is in Libya will soon happen in their countries. It has happened in Tunisia and Egypt, now we see it in Libya. They have to change. -- Emmanuel, Tanzania 
What gives Germany the right to advocate anything? What Germany are you talking about? Germany is still an occupied country! Just because Germany likes foreign occupation (65 years is not enough?) it thinks that other nations love that too? -- Judutarrak, US 
It is becoming more and more imperative for Germany to refrain from giving advice in international matters, such as North Africa and others. Germany's forte is education, innovation and quality of production, as well as basic research from the deep oceans to outer space through all related sciences. Germany must understand that almost all problems popping up now are the consequence of colonialism, slavery and globalization, meaning exploitation through whatever means with the intention for future democracies under a military umbrella. -- HRF, Antigua and Barbuda 
Compiled by Stuart Tiffen
Editor: Michael Lawton Germany

advocates tougher Libya sanctions amid escalating violence 
It's interesting that as long as a dictator does what the mighty dictator demands, it's okay, but as soon as they get older, less adaptable, no longer needed, out they go, and others jump on the bandwagon, like with Iraq, Egypt and now Libya. Out with the old, in with the new. It's all for the greed of oil. -- Marta, US 
First, I would like to congratulate world leaders for their great concern for Libya and other African countries. These leaders are working hard to make sure the situation in Libya gets back to normal and the suffering of Libyans stops. I am asking them to take actions and impose tougher sanctions to Moammar Gadhafi to rescue the lives of innocent people in Libya. I am afraid more delay will cost more lives. I also condemn the silence of African leaders, to them it's like there is nothing happening. They have been all quiet. Their silence proves to the world that most African rulers got to power through non-democratic and unfair elections. I call upon African leaders to wake up, open their eyes and face reality, otherwise, what is in Libya will soon happen in their countries. It has happened in Tunisia and Egypt, now we see it in Libya. They have to change. -- Emmanuel, Tanzania 
What gives Germany the right to advocate anything? What Germany are you talking about? Germany is still an occupied country! Just because Germany likes foreign occupation (65 years is not enough?) it thinks that other nations love that too? -- Judutarrak, US 
It is becoming more and more imperative for Germany to refrain from giving advice in international matters, such as North Africa and others. Germany's forte is education, innovation and quality of production, as well as basic research from the deep oceans to outer space through all related sciences. Germany must understand that almost all problems popping up now are the consequence of colonialism, slavery and globalization, meaning exploitation through whatever means with the intention for future democracies under a military umbrella. -- HRF, Antigua and Barbuda 
Compiled by Stuart Tiffen
Editor: Michael Lawton It's interesting that as long as a dictator does what the mighty dictator demands, it's okay, but as soon as they get older, less adaptable, no longer needed, out they go, and others jump on the bandwagon, like with Iraq, Egypt and now Libya. Out with the old, in with the new. It's all for the greed of oil. -- Marta, US 
First, I would like to congratulate world leaders for their great concern for Libya and other African countries. These leaders are working hard to make sure the situation in Libya gets back to normal and the suffering of Libyans stops. I am asking them to take actions and impose tougher sanctions to Moammar Gadhafi to rescue the lives of innocent people in Libya. I am afraid more delay will cost more lives. I also condemn the silence of African leaders, to them it's like there is nothing happening. They have been all quiet. Their silence proves to the world that most African rulers got to power through non-democratic and unfair elections. I call upon African leaders to wake up, open their eyes and face reality, otherwise, what is in Libya will soon happen in their countries. It has happened in Tunisia and Egypt, now we see it in Libya. They have to change. -- Emmanuel, Tanzania 
What gives Germany the right to advocate anything? What Germany are you talking about? Germany is still an occupied country! Just because Germany likes foreign occupation (65 years is not enough?) it thinks that other nations love that too? -- Judutarrak, US 
It is becoming more and more imperative for Germany to refrain from giving advice in international matters, such as North Africa and others. Germany's forte is education, innovation and quality of production, as well as basic research from the deep oceans to outer space through all related sciences. Germany must understand that almost all problems popping up now are the consequence of colonialism, slavery and globalization, meaning exploitation through whatever means with the intention for future democracies under a military umbrella. -- HRF, Antigua and Barbuda 
Compiled by Stuart Tiffen
Editor: Michael Lawton First, I would like to congratulate world leaders for their great concern for Libya and other African countries. These leaders are working hard to make sure the situation in Libya gets back to normal and the suffering of Libyans stops. I am asking them to take actions and impose tougher sanctions to Moammar Gadhafi to rescue the lives of innocent people in Libya. I am afraid more delay will cost more lives. I also condemn the silence of African leaders, to them it's like there is nothing happening. They have been all quiet. Their silence proves to the world that most African rulers got to power through non-democratic and unfair elections. I call upon African leaders to wake up, open their eyes and face reality, otherwise, what is in Libya will soon happen in their countries. It has happened in Tunisia and Egypt, now we see it in Libya. They have to change. -- Emmanuel, Tanzania 
What gives Germany the right to advocate anything? What Germany are you talking about? Germany is still an occupied country! Just because Germany likes foreign occupation (65 years is not enough?) it thinks that other nations love that too? -- Judutarrak, US 
It is becoming more and more imperative for Germany to refrain from giving advice in international matters, such as North Africa and others. Germany's forte is education, innovation and quality of production, as well as basic research from the deep oceans to outer space through all related sciences. Germany must understand that almost all problems popping up now are the consequence of colonialism, slavery and globalization, meaning exploitation through whatever means with the intention for future democracies under a military umbrella. -- HRF, Antigua and Barbuda 
Compiled by Stuart Tiffen
Editor: Michael Lawton What gives Germany the right to advocate anything? What Germany are you talking about? Germany is still an occupied country! Just because Germany likes foreign occupation (65 years is not enough?) it thinks that other nations love that too? -- Judutarrak, US 
It is becoming more and more imperative for Germany to refrain from giving advice in international matters, such as North Africa and others. Germany's forte is education, innovation and quality of production, as well as basic research from the deep oceans to outer space through all related sciences. Germany must understand that almost all problems popping up now are the consequence of colonialism, slavery and globalization, meaning exploitation through whatever means with the intention for future democracies under a military umbrella. -- HRF, Antigua and Barbuda 
Compiled by Stuart Tiffen
Editor: Michael Lawton It is becoming more and more imperative for Germany to refrain from giving advice in international matters, such as North Africa and others. Germany's forte is education, innovation and quality of production, as well as basic research from the deep oceans to outer space through all related sciences. Germany must understand that almost all problems popping up now are the consequence of colonialism, slavery and globalization, meaning exploitation through whatever means with the intention for future democracies under a military umbrella. -- HRF, Antigua and Barbuda 
Compiled by Stuart Tiffen
Editor: Michael Lawton Compiled by Stuart Tiffen
Editor: Michael Lawton


Death by fire: Self-immolation in the Arab World As the political upheaval that began in Tunisia spreads from Egypt to Libya, dozens of people across the Arab world have publicly set themselves on fire. Are these self-immolations acts of despair or political protest? Last December, a young unemployed street vendor named Mohamed Bouazizi doused himself in paint thinner and set himself on fire outside of the municipal building in the remote Tunisian town Sidi Bouzid. He died of his self-inflicted wounds weeks later. Bouazizi's self-immolation, the act of burning oneself to death, became the symbol of a popular uprising that toppled Tunisia's authoritarian President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali. Inspired by events in Tunisia, the Arab street protests subsequently forced Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak to step down and have now placed Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi under siege. As revolutionary fervor engulfs the Arab world, dozens of people from Morocco to Yemen have lit themselves on fire in front of municipal buildings, parliaments, and presidential palaces. Are these gruesome suicides acts of personal desperation triggered by hopeless social conditions, or are they a form of political protest designed to expose societal injustice and incite popular uprisings? Life not worth living Werner Ruf - an expert on North Africa with the University of Kassel in Germany - told Deutsche Welle that although Bouazizi's suicide focused international attention on self-immolation, the practice had become increasingly common in Tunisia prior to his death. According to Ruf, up to 15 percent of the patients in the special clinic for burn victims in Tunis are victims of self immolation. "The fundamental problem is that there's no way to live with human dignity there," Ruf said. "Consider that every day hundreds of people drown trying to cross from Algeria, Tunisia and Morocco on one side to Spain on the other. These kids know how dangerous that is, that they have a 5 percent chance of surviving the journey." "But their lives are no longer worth anything to them," Ruf continued. "Either I get out, or I die. Whether I drown in the ocean or die at home doesn't matter. With this kind of despair, self-immolation is just one more way to end an undignified life without prospects for the future." In Bouazizi's case, the 26-year-old street vendor set himself on fire after a run in with the authorities. A police officer tried to confiscate Bouazizi's produce cart because he lacked the appropriate permit. When Bouazizi refused to cooperate, the officer slapped him. Ruf believes that Bouazizi's public humiliation at the hands of the state pushed him and the Tunisian people over the edge. "Everywhere people are treated like dirt by the police, the authorities and in the health centers," he said. "People are not treated like human beings. It's no coincidence that in both the big opposition movements, in Egypt and Tunisia, people are demanding their human dignity, to be treated like human beings." Martyr and victim Bouazizi's quickly became a martyr to the political opposition. Protesters rallied around him as a symbol of the need for change as they took to the streets. Public pressure even forced then President Ben Ali to visit Bouazizi at his hospital bedside. Ultimately, the pressure became so great that Ben Ali fled the country. Although Bouazizi's suicide became an important symbol, Adam Lankford of the University of Alabama does not believe the street vendor had a political motivation. Lankford, who began to examine self-immolation after investigating the psychology suicide bombers, told Deutsche Welle that activists later interpreted Bouazizi's suicide as an act of protest. "In these kinds of tumultuous times people want heroes," said Lankford, a professor of criminology. "Frankly, they would prefer to see Bouazizi as a hero, as someone who is willing to sacrifice himself for the greater good rather than the reality which may be that he was a tragic victim." But Michael Biggs, sociology professor at the University of Oxford, believes that Bouazizi thought about more than his own despair. Biggs, who studies self-immolation as an act of protest, says Bouazizi at least implicitly sent a political message when he lit himself on fire in front of the town municipal building. "Talk is cheap," Biggs said. "There are lots of protests and causes out there, people saying that things are unjust. But if you're willing to die that gives you a very credible signal that this isn't just talk about injustice but that this is something that I think is so terrible that I'd rather die."  Massive protests erupted after Bouazizi's death Copycat effect Since Bouazizi's suicide, dozens of people from Morocco to Yemen have lit themselves on fire in public places. These self-immolations usually occur in front of government buildings or other public places and are often carried out by financially strapped people who have been denied services by indifferent bureaucracies. In Egypt, a restaurant owner lit himself on fire in front of the parliament building in Cairo after being denied subsidized bread. A lawyer did the same a day later to protest rising prices. An Algerian woman in a small town southwest of Algiers tried to set herself in flames in front of a municipal building after being denied housing aid. And in the West African country of Mauritania, a man tried to light himself on fire in front of the Senate and presidential buildings in protest against poor governance. These incidents - and many others - all happened within days of each other in January as the political unrest, which began in Tunisia, began to spread across North Africa. Sociology professor Biggs attributes the spate of self-immolations to Bouazizi's suicide in December and the subsequent successful revolution in Tunisia. "One single person's action can make a huge difference," Biggs said. "If we could go back and stop Bouazizi from killing himself then I'm sure there would have been no subsequent suicides or self-immolations in North Africa." "It was precisely because his action was spectacular and spectacularly successful. It seemed to bring about a train of events that led to the overthrow of the regime." Un-Islamic act According to Bigg's, the practice of self-immolation has traditionally been uncommon in the Muslim world. Islam has a strong prohibition against suicide and desecrating the human body, both of which occur during self-immolation. Yet Muslims continue to set themselves onn fire. As recent as late February, the Algerian newspaper El-Watan reported that a 25-year-old man burnt himself to death in a town east of Algiers to protest problems with his identity card.  Under public pressure, then-President Ben Ali visited Bouazizi in the hospital  "These religious sanctions are being overruled by perhaps desperation or a belief that their political regime is intolerable," Biggs said. "And of course that will in some sense change the culture a little bit. Maybe it will become a more common form of tactic in the Middle East." How can this spate of self-burnings, which contradict both religious and secular conventions, be explained? Lankford, the criminal justice professor, says that ultimately the answer is in the eye of the beholder. "Really regardless of what the individual motivation is, it's fine for us to find them tragic, inspiring, or moving or anything else," Lankford said. "That's legitimate, regardless of the intention." Author: Spencer Kimball Editor: Rob Mudge


Calm settles over post-Mubarak Egypt as military promises democracy Egypt's ruling military has promised a transition to democracy - though it remained unclear how or when the transition would occur. Meanwhile, police have quashed protests in other Arab nations. Egypt's military promised Saturday to oversee a peaceful transition to democratic rule, as the country took its first breaths following 18 days of nationwide protests and the end of now former President Hosni Mubarak's 30 years in office. "There will be a peaceful transition of power to the government when the environment allows for a freely elected government that governs the land by democracy," a military spokesman said. Mubarak's cabinet will remain in place until a new government is formed, according to an announcement by the Higher Council of the Armed Forces, to whom Mubarak ceded power when he resigned on Friday. Cairo residents cheered and sang patriotic songs to celebrate the beginning of the post-Mubarak era The Council also said Egypt would respect its past international agreements, in a bid to alleviate Washington and Israel's fears. "The Arab Republic of Egypt is committed to all regional and international obligations and treaties," a senior army officer said in a statement on state television, outlining the armed forces' broad strategies at home and abroad. Israeli Finance Minister Yuval Steinitz welcomed the statement from Egypt, which became the first Arab nation to recognize the Jewish state in a 1979 peace treaty. US President Barack Obama "welcomed the Supreme Council of the Armed Forces' announcement today that it is committed to a democratic civilian transition, and will stand by Egypt’s international obligations," the White House said in a statement. Islamist opposition movement Muslim Brotherhood, viewed warily by many Western powers, praised the army's announced plans to bring in democratic rule and said it would not seek power. Meanwhile, after all-night celebrations that followed Mubarak's departure, thousands of people gathered again Saturday in Cairo's central Tahrir Square. Many civilians worked together to tidy the square - which served as the epicenter for the opposition rallies that toppled Mubarak's rule. Civilians and soldiers worked together to remove road blocks in the area, while Cairo residents photographed each other holding flowers next to smiling soldiers, marking the first day of the post-Mubarak era. A man proudly flashes the headline: 'People removed the regime' Some pro-democracy activists said they would continue demonstrating in Tahrir Square until the Higher Military Council accepts their agenda for democratic reform, including a dissolution of parliament and the lifting of a 30-year-state of emergency used by Mubarak to crush dissent. Return to order The army's first decision on Saturday was to shorten the curfew imposed in Cairo, Alexandria and Suez to last from midnight to 6 a.m. local time, as businesses and banks were expected to open for normal hours on Sunday, the first day of the working week in Egypt. Cairo stock exchange officials said their bourse would reopen on Wednesday, after being closed for nearly three weeks. Meanwhile on Saturday, the new administration took measures to prevent senior government officials from leaving the country, announcing plans to investigate them for possible abuses and corruption. Travel bans and asset freezes were announced for 40 politicians, including former Prime Minister Ahmed Nazif and the much-despised former Interior Minister Habib al-Adly. Egyptian Information Minister Anas al-Fiqi was also placed under house arrest, broadcaster al-Arabiya quoted army sources as saying. Future remains uncertain  Both civilians and army officers were seen taking pictures of the historic day  The military council gave few concrete details of its plans for Egypt's "transitional phase" and released no timetable for presidential or parliamentary elections. Meanwhile, the tumultuous events in Egypt and those that preceded them in Tunisia continued to send shock waves abroad. Police and security services in Yemen and Algeria quashed pro-democracy demonstrations in Algiers and Sanaa. In the Yemeni capital, Sanaa, an opposition demonstration by some 2,000 people broke up Saturday after clashes with pro-government demonstrators armed with knives and batons. In Algiers some 30,000 police were deployed to stop dissidents from staging a march against the government. Author: David Levitz (dpa, Reuters) Editor: Sean Sinico


Outpouring of support for Bassem Youssef following TV show cancelation The suspension of Egyptian satirist Bassem Youssef's television show has triggered messages of support from around the world. His repertoire had been popular with critics of the Egyptian government. Solidarity and shock have been the most common public reactions following the cancelation of AlBernameg - the popular show hosted by Egyptian satirist Bassem Youssef. "We understand why he is taking such a decision - we understand the pressure that was applied on him and his producers," said Ayman Abdel Meguid from the April 6 Youth Movement activist group. "We stand in solidarity with him and we would have liked for him to continue with his program; however, we totally understand and respect the decision." This, he added, can be expected from leaders of such a regime, "and we can only look and laugh at how fragile they are and how they are afraid of freedom of speech." Meguid warned Egyptian society of losing its voice. "Although the Egyptian people sent a very strong message during the elections that they are not interested in the elections, I think this is one more wakeup call," he said. Dutch politician and member of the European Parliament Marietje Schaake said the show's cancelation was a bad omen for freedom of speech and opinion. On Twitter, various people expressed their solidarity. "There is something rotten in the world of the Arabs," tweeted Hisham Melhem, head of the Al Arabiya office in Washington. Meanwhile, radio journalist Ban Barkawi wrote, "When Egypt began to worship Sisi as a god I lost almost all hope in the Arab world. The end of Bassem Youssef sealed the deal." A blow to freedom of speech "This is a bad sign for freedom of expression in Egypt," commented DW Director General Peter Limbourg. DW secured rebroadcasting rights for Youssef's program at the beginning of the year. "Bassem Youssef displayed great courage with his fearless reports on political and societal developments in Egypt," said Limbourg. "We perfectly understand that, in view of what was obviously overwhelming intimidation, he has decided not to continue with his program." He added that DW would continue to support Youssef in the name of freedom of expression and of the press. "I am delighted that we will have him as our guest at the DW Global Media Forum in Bonn from June 30 to July 2," Limbourg said. Unbearable pressure On Monday (02.06.2014) Bassem Youssef announced the cancelation of AlBernameg, which was aired by the Saudi-funded MBC network, at a press conference in Cairo. The exact reasons for the move were not clear even after the conference. Youssef vaguely referred to "powers" that had led to the show's suspension. The decision was premeditated, he said, noting that it was already made before the show's production Youssef entertained viewers all around Egypt with his satirical humor "When the show's script only appeared on paper, nothing was being done yet," said Youssef. "This means the reason is not the content of this one episode, but the show as a whole. In its present form, AlBernameg may not be aired on any Egyptian or Arab channel." Youssef indicated that his decision had been influenced by several factors. "The pressure was too much for one single person," he explained. "I was worried about my safety and that of my family." He rejected offers to have his program aired on foreign channels. "We got many offers from American and European broadcasters, but this would only increase the mistrust," Youssef said. "If AlBernameg was aired outside of Egypt, it would lose its credibility. And people would then say that it's (been manipulated) by foreign agents." Quick rise to popularity Bassem Youssef's TV career had a modest start. A table, a chair and a camera - that was all the equipment he had when he started presenting his opinions on YouTube shortly after the start of the Egyptian revolution. His clips attracted so many fans that he was soon propelled into television stardom. His show first aired in November 2012 on private Egyptian channel CBC. Millions watched as he dished out his criticism of various Egyptian personalities, especially those in power. His statements were so strong that CBC dropped the show in November 2013. In February of this year MBC took over the broadcasts. From mid-February, AlBernameg was aired by DW's Arabic television channel across the whole Arab-speaking region.


'Islam is in a transformative process' Muslims feel conflicted about certain aspects of historical Islam, says the Islamic scholar Abdullahi Ahmed An-Na'im. How does the notion of Sharia fit within the idea of a secular state? Sharia in a secular state -  isn't that a contradiction in terms? Abdullahi Ahmed An-Na'im: The question is: what does one mean by Sharia? People tend to think of the legal end of it, as if that is the whole principle of Sharia. But Sharia consists of the whole normative system of Islam founded in the Koran, the Sunna and the hadith, or tradition of the Prophet. So it is not possible - even in a secular state - to deny Muslims the right to turn to Sharia to answer questions such as how to pray or how to fast. Sharia cannot be enforced by the state anywhere. There is absolutely no possibility to enact Sharia as a law of the state whether it be in a so-called "Muslim majority country" or a tiny Muslim minority anywhere. The nature of Sharia defies codification. It is about the interpretation that people choose through their own conviction. Read more: Liberal mosque in Berlin draws criticism So what is Sharia for you? Sharia provides moral guidance for Muslim individuals. State and religion should be clearly separated. For me, as a Muslim, I need the state to be secular so that I can practice Islam through conviction and choice. The need of the state to be secular derives from an Islamic point of view; it has nothing to do with the European Enlightenment. The state has nothing to do with my being a believer or an atheist. Aya (18 years old from Bielefeld) is one of the participants in the 2017 Young Islam Conference in Berlin. She says: "I feel more German than Moroccan. I grew up with German culture and have a much greater connection to it than to what you could call my other country." So what did some of her fellow participants say about other questions concerning Islam in Germany? Martin (22, Flensburg) says: "No. Europe is getting more culture. I think Europe is going through some painful learning phases at the moment - the Brexit is an example of that. But if you look at the statistics and facts, Europe is not being Islamified. That's just false. You can't support that thesis. It's nonsense." Volkan (24, Siegen) says: "For me it's mainly the feeling of belonging, of not being excluded. As someone from an immigrant background, you get asked a lot of questions that make you realize that you don't really belong. That really bothered me as a child. No matter where I was or what I did, I was always the outsider." Hannah (Kiel, 21) says: "I think the problem in Germany is that people talk a lot about one another instead of talking to one another. We've never learned how to go up to someone and ask: 'Why are you wearing a headscarf?' If you don't take an interest in Islam, you'll never be able to answer such questions. It's so easy to approach someone with a headscarf and ask her to explain." Merve (19, Duisburg): "What irritates me about how Muslims are portrayed is when we're reduced to one single external attribute. For instance, I choose to wear a headscarf. But that doesn't mean I'm some poor helpless thing. And there's much more to me than that. For instance, I'm someone who's proud to be from Duisburg." Ahmed (25, Cologne) says: "The most important thing is always dialogue. With fake news or hate speech on social media, I'd always be ready for a discussion. Especially with Facebook, I'd have the courage to comment on things. I'm very active. I reactivated my facebook account one month ago to take part in the debate about Turkey. It's important for me to discuss things rationally." Aylin (19, Selent) says: "I wouldn't say anything. It would make no sense to talk to these groups. Some people are unwilling to change their minds. The AfD are very convinced of their views, and those left in Pegida must be as well. Those views are, in part, forbidden by the constitution. But I think that at the moment this is just a trend and that many people will come to their senses." Paul, (19, Kiel) says: "Definitely. Germany is a geographical area in which one society lives and acts. Every group that lives in this area is part of Germany. If I live in Germany, I'm part of Germany, and I have the right to say 'I'm German.' As far as I'm concerned people don't even have to speak the language." Author: Jefferson Chase If state and religion are to be clearly separated, what role can religion play in public discourse? I make a distinction between the state and politics. The state has nothing to do with Islam, but politics is a field where religion is always relevant. You cannot keep religion out of politics. Just like the CDU [editor's note: Chancellor Angela Merkel's Christian Democrats] in Germany believes that its political platform is inspired by Christianity, believers - whatever their religion - act politically out of their conviction as believers. Whether you ban Sharia from politics or not, Muslims will continue to act in ways that are consistent with their understanding of Sharia. You cannot prevent that possibility unless you disenfranchise Muslims. Read more: Is Islam changing Germany? Why do you say that this has nothing to do with the Enlightenment and the Western concept of the secular? Going back 1,400 years, when Muslims had their first state in Medina, it was not Islamic or religious. That state was a political institution, it was not described by the people there nor by its enemies as being an Islamic state. The concept of an Islamic state is a post-colonial concept that combines a European idea of the nation state and the idea of Muslim self-determination in terms of Islamic identity. We cannot really claim that everything that is going on around the world is due to the Enlightenment or the European idea of secularism! Permalink http://p.dw.com/p/2ffvd In other words, the secular has many faces? What passes as a secular state in Germany is not acceptable to the secular state in France. The German state would not qualify as a secular state by French standards. The UK, where the Queen is the head of the Church of England, cannot qualify as a secular state even by German standards. And yet everyone would agree that Germany, the UK and France are secular states. That the secular state came out of the European Enlightenment is a huge oversimplification, which is not warranted by European history itself. But the idea of the nation state is European and it has been imposed on colonised regions of the world where Muslims live, on Africa and on Asia. When Muslims emerged out of colonial rule, the form of state they had to live with was the European nation state. They did not choose it, and it was not indigenous to their culture and their values. It was imposed arbitrarily by European powers, and you can see the tragic consequences of that now in Syria and Iraq. Is it because of colonialism that Islam is a state religion in most Arab countries? No, of course not. But what does it mean when Islam is the religion of the state? By the way, there are also non-Muslim states, like Ireland, where you have a religion of the state. The idea that religious identity is fundamental to the people is absolutely understandable and common in human experience, but it has no legal consequences. Mauretania, Pakistan and Iran say that Islam is the religion of the state. Are we suggesting that this means the same thing? As a professor at the Emory University School of Law in Atlanta, Abdullahi Ahmed An-Na'im conducts research into Islamic law, human rights and international law It means that there is no separation between the state and the religious. When you look at Article 2 of the Egyptian constitution it says that Islam is the religion of the state. But there is no other reference to Article 2 in the rest of the constitution. So it is meaningless, propaganda, a way of legitimizing the state. Since a military coup that overthrew the Egyptian Muslim Brotherhood, Egypt has been ruled by the military. Members of the Muslim Brotherhood are now in prison and are being executed for political crimes. The military has taken over the state, and still you have Article 2 saying that Islam is the religion of the state. You have this strong alliance between the state and the religious institutions that serves those who are in power, not much else. Read more: Indian muslims who support Hindu nationalism You are asking Muslims to enter into an "indigenous self-liberalisation from colonisation". What does that mean? It means that the hearts and minds of Muslims continue to be colonised by European epistemology and philosophy, by European ideas of administration of the state, despite the fact that nominally, they have been independent for decades. Colonialism is not just a military occupation, it is a state of mind of both the coloniser and the colonised. The people who are subjected to colonialism contribute to the continuation of colonial ways of thinking by submitting to colonial and neo-colonial policies and priorities. As a Muslim, I myself need to liberate my own mind, heart and soul so that I am my own person. At the same time, I am not rejecting any influence from any other culture, whether European or North American or otherwise. The book opens with Nawal El Saadawi, an Egyptian physician, author and well-known women’s rights advocate. She explains why Middle Eastern women have so far failed to make a breakthrough in their fight: "Women can’t be liberated under the patriarchal, imperialistic and militaristic system that determines our lives now. We are governed by power, not justice; by false democracy, not real freedom." Syrian psychoanalyst Rafah Nached was arrested in Damascus in September 2011 after organizing meetings to help traumatized anti-Assad protesters. She was freed two months later and now lives in exile in Paris. "In the Arab society, change is refused because whoever does not join the mass is considered an atheist or abnormal," she says in Huitfeldt’s book. Shirin Ebadi is an Iranian lawyer who has dedicated her life to fighting for women's, children's, and refugee rights. A target of threats by the government and the police in her country, she was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 2003. "Democracy does not recognize east and west; democracy is people’s will. Therefore, I do not acknowledge the idea of various models of democracy," she says. "Of course, occupation is male, especially military occupation. The conflict between Israel and Palestine is a man-made conflict, and we, as women, have to end it," says Palestinian legislator, activist, and scholar Hanan Ashrawi in the book. Despite making some controversial comments about Jewish refugees, Ashrawi has contributed significantly to the peace process between the two countries. Feminist Amal Basha is from Yemen, which placed last in the UN Gender Equality Index in 2016. Women’s economic, social, and cultural rights are restricted by Sharia law there - but why? "Men are afraid of women because women are the voice of peace. They have no interest in wars since they are not arm dealers willing to milk the country through all sorts of military deals," she says. To end the ongoing civil war in her homeland, both genders will have to change their attitudes, says Libyan Hajer Sharief, a member of the UN advisory committee and Kofi Annan foundation: "If you look into the houses, you will see mothers pushing their young sons to go to the war. Even if they don’t carry weapons themselves, they are definitely contributing to the circle of violence in Libya." Jordanian Rana Husseini is a feminist, human rights defender, and an investigative journalist, whose reporting sheds light on violence against women. "The Jordanian society blames women for everything: for being raped, harassed, giving birth to children of the wrong sex, and even for their husbands’ unfaithful and womanizing behavior. The list is endless," she says on the topic of honor killings. Author: Jan Tomes What does that mean in terms of the secular state? If we mimic European models, we remain colonised even if there is no European control of state institutions as such. By rooting my political thought in our history and trying to unravel the true meaning of Muslim history in its various phases and different parts of the world, I am being independent in my own mind. I'm not interested in mimicking the French, British or German model; I want to root my political doctrine and practice in terms that transcend a European colonial limitation. This is why it is important to elaborate what we mean by Islamic reform. Let Muslims make up their own mind. The actual history of the European Reformation was much more complex than just a German priest nailing some demands on the door of a church. Transformative movements take a long time and they are often a sort of intergenerational consensus that evolves over many generations in many different parts of the region. At the time, the people who were living through it did not realize that they were living through the Christian Reformation. Over time, maybe 100 or 200 years later, people looked back and said: That was the French Revolution. Every year, millions of practicing Muslims across the world fast, pray and give alms in observance of Islam's holiest month. From firing off cannon to lunar sightings, DW explores how Muslims mark the occasion and what it means to the faithful. The sighting of the new moon of Ramadan is practiced by religious authorities across the globe to determine the beginning of the month of fasting. While some observe the new moon with telescopes, others use the naked eye, which is why Ramadan may begin on different days in certain parts of the world. Prayer is often considered a fundamental part of observing the month of fasting. Ramadan traditionally begins with a special prayer known as Tarawih on the eve of the holy month. During Ramadan, practicing Muslims generally participate in communal prayer at their local mosque. The month of fasting represents a period of spiritual discipline and purification. As such, reading and reciting the Quran, Islam's holy book, form an integral part of the traditional rituals observed during Ramadan. The Quran is believed to have been revealed to the Prophet Muhammad during the month of Ramadan. While Islam offers prescribed rituals to observe during Ramadan, many places have local traditions that coincide with the month of fasting. In Sarajevo, a cannon is traditionally fired to mark the breaking of the fast on each day of Ramadan. In Egypt, displaying a decorated lantern known as a "fanous" is part of the tradition. After a long day without food and water, many Muslims traditionally break their fast with a date, the nutritious fruit with which the Prophet Muhammad is believed to have broken his fast. Afterwards, observing Muslims often partake in a communal dinner known as Iftar. The celebration of Eid al-Fitr, or the festival of breaking the fast, marks the official end of Ramadan. From indulging in sweets to offering gifts to loved ones, Muslims celebrate the end of the fasting month with large meals prepared for friends and family. It is considered a joyful time in which to be generous and kind to others. Author: Lewis Sanders IV What does that mean for the renewal of Islam? Muslim reformation is a similar process. There are 1.6 billion Muslims around the world, and one cannot speak of all these varieties of Islam as if they were just one thing where you have a central key, like the ignition in a car, and that's the Muslim Reformation. There are people who float ideas in different parts of the world that can be coherent to local people or not; the person even might be killed before his ideas are accepted. That is not unusual in human history. Are Muslims today in the middle of such a process of reformation? Yes, because they are talking about it, because they feel conflicted about certain aspects of the historical understanding of Islam about the rights of women or about religious freedom. When I was a student at the University of Khartoum more than 40 years ago, I felt a commitment to the constitution, to human rights and democratic principles, but the prevailing understanding of Sharia did not support those values. The fact that I am aware of the need for reform is already part of the process. So, yes, we are in the middle of a transformative process. © Qantara.de 2017


When justice serves political aims An Egyptian court has sentenced civil rights activist Alaa Abdel Fatah to five years in prison for taking part in a prohibited demonstration. The verdict is a setback for the country, says DW’s Kersten Knipp. The verdict was meant to make an impact: five years in prison for participating in an illegal demonstration. Many people who take issue with the politics of the current Egyptian government will probably think twice before expressing their views as part of a protest. Even more so, because it was Alaa Abdel Fatah – one of the most well-known Egyptian civil rights activists – who was sentenced. The average Egyptian has been given to understand that prominence offers no protection from a tough penalty. But the opposite is also true: that the less prominent you are, the tougher the verdict. That's the only conclusion that can be drawn from the sentences handed down to Fatah's less well-known defendants: they were given prison sentences of up to 15 years. It will likely be difficult for Egyptians to view the court's verdict as an isolated case. It brings to mind far too many other verdicts recently handed down by Egyptian courts. Hundreds of Muslim Brotherhood members have been sentenced to death in several trials. Thousands of opponents to the regime are incarcerated. Amnesty International cites sources that say Egypt had some 40,000 political prisoners by the summer of 2014 – most without a proper conviction. DW's Kersten Knipp The judicial developments are in sync with the political ones. When Reporters Without Borders recently published its annual press freedom ranking, Egypt was in 157th place out of a total 180 places. Last autumn, in the wake of a deadly militant attack in Sinai, the editors of 17 private and state newspapers declared that they would no longer tolerate criticism of state institutions. The publishers framed their position as an act of patriotism in difficult times. Others described it as self-censorship. According to press reports, the government also wants to control the Internet in order to suppress "destructive ideas." Among these are "calls to demonstrate," "defamation of religion," "mockery, slander, and obscenity.” It's a whole new world of rubber band legislation. The government defends its political course citing concerns about stability and a duty to fight terrorism. But there's a growing impression that it is equally about catapulting the country back to pre-revolutionary times. Before 2011, the government faced very little resistance, and politics didn't have to contend all that much with annoying troublemakers. The political elite don't seem to care much that the calm prevailing then had less to do with popular acceptance of the government, and more to do with the fear of landing in one of its jails. It's doubtful whether those times will come again. The terrorism in Sinai shows that not everyone is intimidated by the regime. Above all, you have to ask yourself who is actually being targeted in the fight against terrorism: just the sympathizers of Islamic State in Sinai? Or all those who use peaceful means to criticize Sisi's politics, whether on a religious or secular basis? Monday's verdict would indicate that the Egyptian justice system has a rather expansive understanding of activities deemed harmful to the state. The Mubarak regime toppled four years ago was seen in Europe and the US as an anchor of political stability. This view has stripped the West of sympathy in Egypt as well as in other Arab countries ruled by power-hungry regimes. Resentment of dictators resulted in protests that, in turn, cost hundreds of thousands of people their lives. The mass killings will only end when democratic regimes and institutions establish themselves in the Middle East. Otherwise, revolution will follow revolution in the region.


Cairo court rules Hamas offshoot a 'terrorist' group An Egyptian court has designated the military wing of Hamas a terrorist organization, signaling further strains between Egypt's government and the movement that rules the Gaza Strip in the Palestinian territories. On Saturday, an Egyptian court banned the armed wing of the Palestinian group Hamas, the Izzedine al-Qassam Brigades, which had recently been removedfrom an EU terror list, and designated it a terrorist organization. Hamas officials have repeatedly denied involvement in cross-border attacks in Egypt, and a spokesman in Gaza described the court's decision as political. "Hamas, which is a liberation movement that only fights the Israeli occupation, completely rejects the court's decision and rejects pushing its name into internal Egyptian affairs," spokesman Sami Abu Zuhri said on Saturday. Ties between Egypt and Hamas have soured since 2013, when the army overthrew President Mohammed Morsi, a senior leader of the Muslim Brotherhood, of which the Palestinian political faction is an offshoot. Egypt has already outlawed and listed the Brotherhood as a terrorist group. A government crackdown on Morsi's supporters has killed more than 1,400 people. String of deaths Officials have also said that militants smuggle weapons from the Hamas-ruled Gaza Strip into Egypt, where they end up going to groups fighting to topple the government. Egypt's military claims to have destroyed more than 1,600 tunnels since Morsi's ouster. In early January, Egypt began work on doubling the width of a buffer zone along the border with Gaza to prevent militants infiltrating from the enclave. Militants based in Egypt's Sinai region, which shares a border with Gaza, have killed hundreds of police and soldiers since Morsi's political demise. The case against Hamas came after allegations that the Izzedine al-Qassam Brigades had staged terrorist attacks to support the Brotherhood, and carried out a bombing and shooting operation that killed 33 security personnel in the Sinai Peninsula in October. "The court ruled to ban the Qassam Brigades and to list it as a terrorist group," Judge Mohamed al-Sayid said Saturday in an interview with Reuters. He was commenting on the special Cairo tribunal, which deals with urgent cases. Saturday's verdict comes two days after a string of coordinated attacks on Egyptian security facilities in northern Sinai killed at least 40 people, mostly soldiers. An "Islamic State" affiliate formerly known as Ansar Beit al-Maqdis claimed responsibility for those attacks, among Egypt's deadliest in years. A police crackdown on protesters on the fourth anniversary of the 2011 revolution to overthrow former ruler Hosni Mubarak left at least 15 people dead on January 25. On Thursday, a group of women staged a demonstration in Cairo to protest against deaths by police at political rallies. mkg/cmk (Reuters, AFP, dpa, AP)


Quadriga Counter-revolution in Egypt - Bitter Battle for Power Egypt has voted for a new president. But the new head of state may end up with little say. Just days before the runoff, the Supreme Court ordered the dissolution of the Islamist-dominated parliament. And just as polls were closing late Sunday, the council issued an interim constitution, further strengthening the ruling military council’s grip on power. The move gives the generals temporary law-making powers, as well as responsibility for the national budget and the development of a new constitution.    The presidential election was meant to herald an orderly transition to a new democratic era. But instead, 16 months after the ousting of the Mubarak regime, the threat of fresh unrest is growing.  How long will Egyptians who took to the streets in the Arab Spring be willing to stand by and watch this creeping counter-revolution?   Have your say: Counter-revolution in Egypt - Bitter Battle for Power Write to us: Quadriga@dw.de Asiem El Difraoui – The journalist and academic with a BA Honours in Economics and Politics attended the School of Oriental and African Studies at the University of London and taught at the Institut d'Etudes Politiques in Paris. He worked as Editor in Chief for IP Productions, a news agency focusing on the Middle East and Arab world and is the author of numerous prize-winning documentaries and news reports. He is currently a part of the Research Group Near/Middle East and Africa at the Stiftung Wissenschaft und Politik in Berlin Hamed Abdel-Samad –  The son of a Sunni Imam who moved fro Egypt to Germany at the age of 23. He studied political science in Augsburg and English and French at Cairo University. After his studies, he taught at the Institute for Jewish History and Culture at the University of Munich. Since 2009, he has worked exclusively as a freelance writer and journalist. His works include „My Farewell from Heaven: the Life of a Muslim in Germany, and „The Downfall of the Islamic World: A Forecast. Esther Saoub -  Studied Comparative Literature, Islamic Studies and Judaism in Berlin and Arabic in Damascus. She qualified as a journalist while attached to public broadcasters SDR / SWR and then joined SWR as a radio reporter. In 2006 she went to Cairo as ARD correspondent returning in 2011. She is now part of the Religion and Society Department at SWR with responsibility for Islam and the Arab World.


Egypt's Coptic Christians vote for new pope A council of more than 2,000 Egyptian Coptic Christians will vote for a new leader on Monday. The new pope will be tasked with leading the region's largest Christian minority through Egypt's post-revolution era. The ballot comes after the death of Pope Shenouda III, who headed the church for four decades before his death in March. The new leader will become the 118th head of the Coptic Church. Whoever is elected to succeed Shenouda will be in charge of leading the region's largest Christian minority through increased sectarian tension in Egypt's post-revolution era. The council - made up of senior clergy, current and former Coptic officials, journalists, local advisers and MPs - will choose between five candidates: three bishops and two monks. The names of the three receiving the highest number of votes will be written on separate pieces of paper and placed into a box on the altar of Saintt Mark's Cathedral in Cairo. On November 4, a blindfolded child will select one piece of paper. The new Pope will then be enthroned in a ceremony on November 18. The five candidates are Bishop Rafael, 54, a medical doctor and current assistant bishop for central Cairo; Bishop Tawadros, 60, of the Nile Delta province of Beheira; Father Rafael Ava Mina, 70; Father Seraphim al-Souriani, 53 and Father Pachomious al-Suriani, 49. Coptic Christians make up between 6 and 10 percent of Egypt's total population of 83 million. Many are concerned about persecution resulting from the rise of Islamists in Egypt following the election of Mohamed Morsi. This concern comes despite the new president's promise to be a leader "for all Egyptians." jr/dr (AFP, dpa)


Egypt's army expands economic power While the people of Egypt suffer from growing poverty and unemployment rates, the country's generals are well off. They have managed to strengthen their economic power in the aftermath of the revolution. Egypt's army is poised to place yet another candidate from its ranks at the helm of the country within a few weeks. Former army chief Abdel-Fattah el-Sissi (pictured above) is widely expected to secure a landslide victory in presidential elections on May 26. Behind the scenes, Egypt's army - the biggest in the Mideast region - has regained its former strength. That is also reflected in terms of economic power. After the toppling of Islamic President Mohamed Morsi of the Muslim Brotherhood, Egypt's generals managed to secure several multibillion dollar projects. "Many investors openly approach the army," said Sherif Zaazaa, a business expert and journalist who works for the Egyptian news portal Mada Masr. "They know that it's solely the army that's in control." Billions from Gulf States While privately owned companies struggle under the burden of overall chaos and political insecurity, the army appears to have been unaffected. According to some observers, the army is indeed profiting from the crisis. Mansour allowed the government to offer contracts without a transparent tender process Over the past months, the government in Cairo has commissioned construction companies operated by the military to carry out several large infrastructure projects. In November, Interim President Adly Mansour had issued a decree allowing the government to skip the tender process when placing an order - companies run by the army have largely profited from that move. But especially foreign investors have been doing business with army generals. In March, the army closed a $40 billion (29 billion euro) housing project with Arabtec, a construction company from the United Arab Emirates. Egypt's army also closely works together with Gulf States partners when it comes to energy supply and other commercial sectors. "A lot of these deals are happening because it's the Gulf States leaders' way of supporting the military and to help them maintain influence and power in Egypt," said Shana Marshall, who heads the Institute for Middle East Studies at the George Washington University in Washington, DC. Learning from Morsi's mistakes By supporting Egypt's army, Saudi Arabia especially - as well as the United Arab Emirates - hope to keep the Muslim Brotherhood at bay. Monarchs in those countries were concerned when Morsi, a member of the Muslim Brotherhood, was in charge. They regard the Muslim Brotherhood's take on linking Islam with democracy as an attack on their own authoritarian rule. Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates want to keep the Muslim Brotherhood at bay Morsi had used caution when dealing with the army, and did not dare to curtail its economic power. But his unpopularity, along with the unpopularity of his Freedom and Justice Party, gave the army as an excuse to seize complete control of the country, according to Marshall. Estimates differ on how much of Egypt's economy is controlled by the army - figures range from 5 to 60 percent. The country's defense budget, and other figures that could shed light on the army's true power, are kept secret. Economic powerhouse What is clear, however, is that the army has its hands in every single important sector - from pasta production, to manufacture of furniture and television sets, to oil production and infrastructure projects. The army owns hospitals and Red Sea tourist resorts, and has taken a leading role in agriculture. The army also takes part in the construction business These army-owned companies are usually headed by retired military personnel, who earn well privately in addition to collecting their public pensions. They are also not so interested in becoming politically active. It's not clear how many people in the army support el-Sissi as president, Zaazaa said. "That's why it's all the more important to keep potential critics occupied." However, army personnel in suits generally lack business expertise. In order to stay competitive, the army had to resort to other measures: Their companies usually don't have to pay taxes, they profit from massive subsidies and can turn to enlisted personnel as cheap labor. In the aftermath of the revolution on January 25, 2011, many Egyptians called for an end to these practices. However, these calls are hardly heard anymore - also because state-controlled media continue to praise the army as Egypt's savior from the Islamists. Zaazaa thinks that things could change, should Egypt's economic situation not pick up pace under el-Sissi's rule. Marshall, on the other hand, warns that if many Egyptians suffer economically, that could dampen interest in transparency as they struggle to make ends meet.


Serbian non-violence group shares know-how with Egyptian activists The Egyptian protesters who toppled President Mubarak weren't just inspired by their Tunisian neighbors: They also got inspiration and advice from the Serbian youth movement that helped bring down Slobodan Milosevic. Egyptian protesters ended President Hosni Mubarak's 30-year rule through strategic mass mobilization and effective but non-violent resistance. Some of those activists were inspired by a Serbian group called "Otpor," which means resistance. Otpor had a significant role in the overthrowing of Slobodan Milosevic in 2000, and its member have since founded the non-governmental organization the Center for Applied NonViolent Action and Strategies (CANVAS). Through CANVAS, the non-violent legacy of Otpor lives on and has inspired revolutionaries in Georgia, Ukraine and now Egypt. They provide guides to non-violent resistance in multiple languages, and their book "Nonviolent Struggle - 50 Crucial Points" has been downloaded tens of thousands of times and was translated into Arabic and Farsi in 2009. The Egyptian opposition group the April 6 Youth Movement - named for their 2008 worker strike, which was violently suppressed - met with Otpor activists in Belgrade. There they gathered the important know-how they then put into action on January 28 when they peacefully took over Tahrir Square in Cairo, despite massive efforts by the police to stop them. They even use the same raised fist logo of Otpor and CANVAS. A spreading movement?   Former Otpor member Srdjan Milivojevic is now a member of the Democratic Party in Serbia and told Deutsche Welle he's not surprised that the group's ideas live on in other revolutions. Popovic praised the Egyptians for their non-violence  "I'm totally convinced that Otpor's core concept, namely the non-violent struggle against a dictatorship and the non-violent struggle for change under a non-democratic regime, is exciting to people who yearn for freedom around the world," he said. The head of CANVAS and another former Otpor member, Srdja Popovic, said he was impressed by the Egyptians' "disciplined non-violence." They denied the regime's hoped for escalation with their pacifism, he said. "The Egyptian protest movement has shown in an inspiring way that in these Arab countries there's an enormous potential for resistance that can develop into a pan-Arab movement," he added. Author: Ivica Petrovic / hf Editor: Nancy Isenson


Pro and anti-Morsi supporters stage shows of strength Supporters and opponents of deposed Egyptian President Mohammed Morsi have gathered in the Egyptian capital. The army has warned "decisively" against violence between the two sides. Demonstrators from both the secular-liberal and Islamist side of Egypt's political divide rallied on Sunday, with each drawing tens of thousands of supporters. The Muslim Brotherhood was pressing ahead with its campaign of demonstrations calling for the reinstatement of ex-President Mohammed Morsi, after his removal from office by the army on Wednesday. Islamists gathered outside the headquarters of Egypt's Republican Guard, where Morsi is believed to be held in custody by the army. Permalink http://p.dw.com/p/193PS Morsi was replaced as head of state on Thursday by senior judge Adly Mansour, in what Islamists condemn as a coup. Smoke trails in sky Meanwhile, the Brotherhood's opponents called for a demonstration of support for the military handover in the city's Tahrir Square. Air force jets flew above the square, drawing a smoke trail representing the Egyptian flag in the sky. The Tamarod movement, which staged the June 30 rallies that resulted in Morsi's overthrow, urged people to gather at Tahrir and the Ittihadiya presidential palace to "complete the revolution." The military deployed troops at points throughout the capital, amid fears of violence between the two groups. An army statement warned against "provocative actions," vowing that violations would be "dealt with decisively, under the law." Banners showed the protesters' anger with the United States, who they perceive as having supported Morsi. Obama insisted overnight into Sunday that the US was "not aligned" with any Egyptian party or group following Morsi's ouster. German support ‘dependent' German Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle on Sunday said that German support for the new administration depended on a return to democratic transition. "This is the standard by which we will judge the new government in Cairo," said Westerwelle. "The more clear the democratic transformation becomes, the more committed Germany will be in its support." A Cairo court on Sunday cleared 12 activists from charges that they had incited violence at protests near to the Muslim Brotherhood's headquarters in March. On Saturday, interim President Mansour's office went back on a decision to appoint opposition leader Mohamed ElBaradei to the post of prime minister. The decision came after the Islamist Salafi al-Nour party objected to the Nobel Peace Prize winner's appointment. rc /mz (AFP, AP, dpa, Reuters)


Egypt, Gulf States strengthen their ties During the Egyptian revolution, the Gulf States distanced themselves from Egypt. But ties are improving again now in accordance with an old rule: Good relationships are based on mutual benefits. Cairo and the Arab Gulf states are currently taking steps towards each other, and for many it's a sign of a new beginning. Traditionally, Egyptian relations to the Gulf States have been positive; under Mubarak, too, friendships existed between the different heads of state - but these relationships have also often cooled. Over the course of the past six years, and especially during the Arab Spring, two political axes emerged: Egypt - Saudi Arabia on the one side, and Syria - Qatar on the other. After the fall of Mubarak, these axes shifted, with Qatar welcoming the uprising on the Nile and in Damascus, while Saudi Arabia maintained its support for Mubarak until the end. Indeed, Egypt's foreign policy towards the Gulf States has been and still is based on a calculation involving three factors: competing with Riyadh over political importance in the region, realising its own economic interests and strengthening its policy of alliances across the Middle East. Mutual distrust? What might the future of Egypt's relationship with the Gulf States look like? For one, the Egyptian Muslim Brotherhood already cooperates with its counterparts in other Arabic and Islamic states around the globe. They all seek to take over the political power in their respective countries - plans that trouble the Gulf State governments, especially in Saudi Arabia. And there are the Wahabi, a group of ultra-conservative Islamists rooted in Saudi Arabia and counting the royal family among its members, who don't tolerate any other Islamic forms of belief besides their own. Mursi chaired the Muslim Brotherhood's party ahead of his election In the beginning, this led to mutual distrust between the Gulf States and the new political leaders in Egypt and to a dead-end in foreign relations. Looking back, Abdul Khaleq Abdulla, professor for political science at the UAE University in Al-Ain, endorses the Gulf States' action at that time. "After the fall of Mubarak, the leaders of the Gulf States couldn't be sure what form of a political alternative would seize power in Cairo. And the fact that this alternative came in the form of an Islamic movement spread uncertainty. It was unclear what positions they would adopt. That's why, in the beginning, the relationships experienced some turbulence." Muhammad Abdul Kader, a researcher at the Cairo Al-Ahram Center for Political and Strategic Studies shares this view: "Some Gulf States are worried about the rise of the Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt, and that's why I believe relations will be a bit strained to start with, and that they will only strengthen over time." Seeking a solid economic base In Egypt, the Muslim Brotherhood sees its main task as stabilizing the economy, since their political power will also be measured against the country's economic development. Given the bad state of the Egyptian economy, it's unlikely that the new government has any interest in upsetting its Gulf State neighbors. Egypt needs the financial support of the Gulf States - and the Gulf States, in return, need Egypt's assurances that the revolution isn't going to reach them.  "President Mursi's statement that Egypt doesn't have any ambitions of spreading the revolution to other Arab countries was a relief for several Gulf States - particularly for the UAE and Saudi Arabia," said Muhammad Abdul Kader. Gulf States leaders hope Egypt's revolution will not spread The credo of Arab politicians has long been that only a politically and economically strong Egypt can also strengthen the Arab World. There have been various attempts to realize this vision. For 2012, Qatar has agreed to offer financial aid over $2 billion (1.6 billion euros) to Egypt. That move was preceded by Saudi Arabia's promise of $2.7 billion (2.2 billion euros). Iran and its Egyptian brothers It angered the Gulf States when Iran attempted to win over the Egyptian leadership in the name of common religious and political interests. But Egypt's response to Iran didn't go far, due in part to long-standing political tradition in Egypt, which directs its political course towards the Gulf States and towards South Arabia, in particular. And this tradition leaves no doubt that Egypt has always seen itself as an ally to the Golf States, not Iran. According to Abdullah, "Egypt has a deeply rooted relationship with the Gulf States, especially with Saudi Arabia, the UAE and the other Arabic Gulf States. It was like that before the beginning of the revolution, and that's how it is going to stay." In fact, it's the strong relationship between Egypt and the Gulf States that many see as a good opportunity to help slow down Iran's political approach on Egypt.  "The Gulf States regard Iran as a difficult neighbour," Abdullah said, adding, "We live geographically close to it and have to tolerate its provocations. We do see Iran as a source of instability within the region."


Egypt orders military trial for 48 'Islamic State' suspects over church attacks Egypt's top prosecutor has accused the suspects of involvement in attacks on churches and military targets. The militant group has increasingly targeted Christians after launching an armed insurgency in northern Sinai. Egyptian authorities referred 48 suspected members of the "Islamic State" militant group to military trial for involvement in three deadly church bombings, Egypt's chief prosecutor Nabil Sadeq said in a statement on Sunday. At least 75 people have been killed in "Islamic State"-claimed attacks on Coptic churches in December and April, including two in Tanta and Alexandria on Palm Sunday. Sadeq said that 31 of the suspected militants are in custody, but 17 remain at large. According to the prosecutor, the suspects allegedly set up "Islamic State" cells in Cairo and the southern province of Qena. The suspected militants allegedly received training in Syria and Libya. In the statement, Sadeq also accused the suspects of participating in a separate attack on a checkpoint in Egypt's Western Desert, which left eight law enforcement agents dead. Egypt's armed forces have struggled to quash an armed insurgency in northern Sinai since President Abdel-Fattah el-Sissi led a military coup against the country's first democratically-elected leader, Mohammed Morsi of the Muslim Brotherhood, in 2013. Permalink http://p.dw.com/p/2b11v Terrorism in Egypt With the rise of the "Islamic State" in 2014, the militant group Ansar Bayt al-Maqdis pledged allegiance to the militant group and rebranded as the Sinai Province, vowing to enact a brutal campaign to recreate a caliphate in Egypt. Although the Sinai Province initially launched attacks against military and state security targets in northern Sinai, it claimed responsibility for the downing of a Russian airliner in 2015 that killed 224 people on board, many of them Russians. Since then, the group has increasingly targeted Egypt's Coptic Christian community in the country's urban centers. In December, the "Islamic State" claimed responsibility for a church attack that left 29 people dead in central Cairo. The Coptic community comprises roughly 10 percent of Egypt's population of about 90 million. Although pockets of sectarian violence have emerged in the wake of Egypt's 2011 revolution, the Coptic community maintains relatively amicable relations with the country's Muslim majority. Islamic State (IS) - also known as ISIL, ISIS and Daesh - is an al-Qaida splinter group with a militant Sunni Islamist ideology. It emerged in the aftermath of the US-led invasion of Iraq in 2003 and is led by Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi. The group's goal is to create a worldwide "caliphate." It gained worldwide notoriety in 2014 after a blitzkrieg military campaign that resulted in the capture of Mosul. IS is believed to be operational in more than a dozen countries across the world. It controls territories in Iraq and Syria. However, the group has lost much of the territory it controlled in Iraq and Syria at the height of its expansion in 2014. The US leads an international coalition of more than 50 countries, including several Arab nations. Russia, Iran and its Lebanese Shiite ally Hezbollah, which all support the Syrian government, also fight IS. Regional forces such as the Kurdish peshmerga (above) and US-backed Syrian Kurdish fighters, fight IS on the ground. The Iraqi army and militia have pushed IS from large parts of the country. One of IS' main sources of income has been oil and gas. At one point, it controlled an estimated one-third of Syria's oil production. However, US-led airstrikes deliberately targeted oil resources and the Syrian government as well as US-backed Syrian Kurdish fighters have retaken most oil wells. Other means of income include taxes, ransom, selling looted antiquities and extortion. IS has claimed responsibility for numerous terrorist attacks across the globe. The militant group has targeted capitals across the EU, including Berlin, Brussels and Paris. IS leaders have encouraged so-called "lone wolf" attacks, whereby individuals who support IS carry out terrorist acts without the direct involvement of the group. The group uses various tactics to expand its power. IS fighters have looted and destroyed historical artifacts in Syria and Iraq in an attempt at "cultural cleansing." The group has also enslaved thousands of women from religious minority groups, including Yazidis. IS also uses a sophisticated social network to distribute propaganda and recruit sympathizers. IS has further exacerbated the ongoing Syrian conflict. Millions of Syrians and Iraqis have fled their homes, many traveling to Europe in pursuit of refuge. Although it has lost all of its strongholds, the militant group has left extraordinary destruction in its wake. Areas affected by the militant group's rule will likely take years to rebuild. Author: Rachel Stewart ls/jlw (Reuters, AFP, AP)


Egypt aims to throttle its civil society Egyptian President Abdel Fattah Al Sisi has passed a number of laws which will effectively weaken the country's civil society. Local NGOs will suffer under the new laws but also foreign ones. One call was enough to stop all activities of the Friedrich Naumann Foundation (CNF). "Egypt's foreign ministry told us that our current legal basis was not adequate and that we would have to re-register," René Klaff, head of the Cairo office of the economically liberal CNF, told DW. That means that all events within Egypt have to be suspended until a registration within the framework of the NGO law. This doesn't only apply to the Friedrich Naumann Foundation; the ministry for social affairs has set a deadline of November 10 for all NGOs to re-register or close their doors. "But we aren't an NGO. We are a German political foundation. And we have assumed up to now that the NGO legislation only applied to Egyptian NGOs and not for us," Klaff said. Wave of laws to undermine civil society The registration obligation is part of a campaign against Egyptian civil society. In the past few months, President Abdel Fattah Al Sisi has signed into law a number of bills that effectively undermine the public sphere. Among others, criminal law has been made stricter. According to the new legislation, organizations in future can be prosecuted for receiving frunds from abroad if it undermines interests of the Egyptian state. "The question is, how the state will define and interpret what undermines 'Egyptian interests' and whether or not we are willing to spend the next 15 years behind bars," says Gasser Abdel Razek of the Egyptian Initiative for Personal Rights (EIPR). The rights organization has in the past strongly criticized the government and actions by police and military, for example, the clearance of a Muslim Brotherhood protest camp on Rabaa Square, which became called the Rabaa massacre, last August, in which around 1,000 people were killed within just a few hours. 'The obstacles set up by the state are too high' EIPR has worked in Cairo since 2002, but now its days are numbered. Most of the organization's 76 employees, mostly legal experts, will have to find a new job from February. The obstacles that the state is currently setting up are too high. It is simply too dangerous to accept foreign money, the organization said. And without foreign money, EIPR cannot pay its people. Minister asks for understanding EIPR's management wants to avoid at all costs that other employees meet the same fate as the young human rights lawyer Yara Sallam. "On December 28 her case will be taken up again, after she has been in jail for six months and one week," Abdel Razek explains. Sallam was sentenced to three years in prison for breaking the so-called demonstration law. That legislation is from November 2013 and stipulates that demonstrators must register with the interior ministry beforehand. This regulation is also part of the government's strategy to restrict public debate, which became very lively after the 2011 revolution, Abdel Razek believes. Many foreign NGOs have already had to leave Egypt People at the ministry for social affairs don't seem to understand what all the upset is about. In an interview with Reuters news agency, Minister Ghada Wali asked representatives of civil society to be patient. She labeled the harsh criticism on the new NGO law as "immature" and too soon. She said it was simply about keeping an overview of all NGOs active in the country. At a press conference at the beginning of December, a representative of the ministry announced that there would be a database by the end of the year to list all 45,000 NGOs which have registered and that around seven percent of the organizations would be closed. Reasons for this were not provided by the ministry. This is not expected to happen to the Friedrich Naumann Foundation, the foreign ministry announced. "We are a renowned institution, whose objectives and values are shared by the Egyptian government, they told us. So it's not about ending our work here," project director Klaff explained. On the contrary: the foundation is only supposed to clarify its legal status so it can continue to work unchallenged in Egypt in future. Klaff and his colleagues will figure out how to manage that in the coming weeks.


Quadriga Human Rights - The Social Media Revolution The cell phone and the internet have become cornerstones of the modern world. They have revolutionized people's everyday lives and social interaction. These new means of communication enable individuals to become part of ever-greater social networks while processing information at a breathtaking pace. The activities of bloggers and tweeters may have once been dismissed as mere chatter, but their influence on politics and society is growing. An inexorable movement of free expression is underway - first and foremost in the Arab world. 
The despots of this world despise the internet, Facebook and bloggers because these voices and media threaten their regimes. Young Arabs have seized the opportunity to resist their authoritarian regimes by organizing networks online and mobilizing masses of people. The Net knows no borders. The spirit of revolution is gripping one nation after another. It has already deposed the presidents of Tunisia and Egypt. Other dictatorships are stopping at nothing to cling to power against their own people. In Libya the international community has even had to intervene to protect the population from the regime of Muammar Gaddafi. 
For the despots the internet is the seed of calamity. The Egyptian government blocked access to social networks and partially shut down mobile phone services in a bid to stop the Facebook revolution. The whole country was practically cut off, but the fight had long since moved, inexorably, from the virtual world to the streets. 
What do you think? Human Rights - The Social Media Revolution 
Email us at: Quadriga@dw-world.de 
Our guests: 

Guido Baumhauer - After studying history and economics in Cologne and Washington and training at Deutsche Welle, he became a television correspondent in 1996 at DW's Brussels studio. There he worked as an administrative and technical manager of EU projects and pioneered work in Internet TV. He teaches at the University of Applied Sciences for Media and Communication and has been conducting seminars on the media for more than 10 years. As editor-in-chief, he made DW's internet presence one of the most diverse on the Net. Since January 1, 2006 he has been Director of Distribution for Strategy, Sales and Marketing at DW. Specialist journal "Cable & Satellite recently included him among the to 50 experts worldwide for broadband and pay TV. Baumhauer has also been appointed to the World Economic Forum's Global Agenda Council on the future of the media. 

Markus Beckedahl - Since 2002, Beckedahl has been blogging about politics in a digital society at netzpolitik.org, an award-winning blog widely read across the German-speaking parts of the world. He is also co-founder of "newthinking communications", a Berlin-based agency specializing in open-source strategies and digital culture. Beckedahl has been organizing re:publica's conferences on blogs, social media and digital society since 2007. He serves as an expert to the German parliament's Enquete Commission on Internet and Digital Society and is a member of the media council for the Berlin-Brandenburg Media Broadcasting Authority. Beckedahl also teaches as a college lecturer on digital media topics. 

Nora Lafi - is a French historian of Algerian origin, born near Marseilles. She is currently a researcher with the "Zentrum Moderner Orient" (ZMO) in Berlin. Lafi is a specialist on the history of the Ottman Empire, specifically of Arab settlements in North Africa and the Middle-East during the Ottoman period. She chairs, with Ulrike Freitag, the research field "Cities compared: cosmopolitanism in the Mediterranean and beyond," part of the EUME programme at the "Wissenschaftskolleg" Berlin think tank. She is co-founder and editor of "H-Mediterranean" (H-Net, Michigan State University). Nora Lafi is a significant expert in the following fields: History of the Ottoman Empire History of Libya, Tunisia and Algeria. The despots of this world despise the internet, Facebook and bloggers because these voices and media threaten their regimes. Young Arabs have seized the opportunity to resist their authoritarian regimes by organizing networks online and mobilizing masses of people. The Net knows no borders. The spirit of revolution is gripping one nation after another. It has already deposed the presidents of Tunisia and Egypt. Other dictatorships are stopping at nothing to cling to power against their own people. In Libya the international community has even had to intervene to protect the population from the regime of Muammar Gaddafi. 
For the despots the internet is the seed of calamity. The Egyptian government blocked access to social networks and partially shut down mobile phone services in a bid to stop the Facebook revolution. The whole country was practically cut off, but the fight had long since moved, inexorably, from the virtual world to the streets. 
What do you think? Human Rights - The Social Media Revolution 
Email us at: Quadriga@dw-world.de 
Our guests: 

Guido Baumhauer - After studying history and economics in Cologne and Washington and training at Deutsche Welle, he became a television correspondent in 1996 at DW's Brussels studio. There he worked as an administrative and technical manager of EU projects and pioneered work in Internet TV. He teaches at the University of Applied Sciences for Media and Communication and has been conducting seminars on the media for more than 10 years. As editor-in-chief, he made DW's internet presence one of the most diverse on the Net. Since January 1, 2006 he has been Director of Distribution for Strategy, Sales and Marketing at DW. Specialist journal "Cable & Satellite recently included him among the to 50 experts worldwide for broadband and pay TV. Baumhauer has also been appointed to the World Economic Forum's Global Agenda Council on the future of the media. 

Markus Beckedahl - Since 2002, Beckedahl has been blogging about politics in a digital society at netzpolitik.org, an award-winning blog widely read across the German-speaking parts of the world. He is also co-founder of "newthinking communications", a Berlin-based agency specializing in open-source strategies and digital culture. Beckedahl has been organizing re:publica's conferences on blogs, social media and digital society since 2007. He serves as an expert to the German parliament's Enquete Commission on Internet and Digital Society and is a member of the media council for the Berlin-Brandenburg Media Broadcasting Authority. Beckedahl also teaches as a college lecturer on digital media topics. 

Nora Lafi - is a French historian of Algerian origin, born near Marseilles. She is currently a researcher with the "Zentrum Moderner Orient" (ZMO) in Berlin. Lafi is a specialist on the history of the Ottman Empire, specifically of Arab settlements in North Africa and the Middle-East during the Ottoman period. She chairs, with Ulrike Freitag, the research field "Cities compared: cosmopolitanism in the Mediterranean and beyond," part of the EUME programme at the "Wissenschaftskolleg" Berlin think tank. She is co-founder and editor of "H-Mediterranean" (H-Net, Michigan State University). Nora Lafi is a significant expert in the following fields: History of the Ottoman Empire History of Libya, Tunisia and Algeria. For the despots the internet is the seed of calamity. The Egyptian government blocked access to social networks and partially shut down mobile phone services in a bid to stop the Facebook revolution. The whole country was practically cut off, but the fight had long since moved, inexorably, from the virtual world to the streets. 
What do you think? Human Rights - The Social Media Revolution 
Email us at: Quadriga@dw-world.de 
Our guests: 

Guido Baumhauer - After studying history and economics in Cologne and Washington and training at Deutsche Welle, he became a television correspondent in 1996 at DW's Brussels studio. There he worked as an administrative and technical manager of EU projects and pioneered work in Internet TV. He teaches at the University of Applied Sciences for Media and Communication and has been conducting seminars on the media for more than 10 years. As editor-in-chief, he made DW's internet presence one of the most diverse on the Net. Since January 1, 2006 he has been Director of Distribution for Strategy, Sales and Marketing at DW. Specialist journal "Cable & Satellite recently included him among the to 50 experts worldwide for broadband and pay TV. Baumhauer has also been appointed to the World Economic Forum's Global Agenda Council on the future of the media. 

Markus Beckedahl - Since 2002, Beckedahl has been blogging about politics in a digital society at netzpolitik.org, an award-winning blog widely read across the German-speaking parts of the world. He is also co-founder of "newthinking communications", a Berlin-based agency specializing in open-source strategies and digital culture. Beckedahl has been organizing re:publica's conferences on blogs, social media and digital society since 2007. He serves as an expert to the German parliament's Enquete Commission on Internet and Digital Society and is a member of the media council for the Berlin-Brandenburg Media Broadcasting Authority. Beckedahl also teaches as a college lecturer on digital media topics. 

Nora Lafi - is a French historian of Algerian origin, born near Marseilles. She is currently a researcher with the "Zentrum Moderner Orient" (ZMO) in Berlin. Lafi is a specialist on the history of the Ottman Empire, specifically of Arab settlements in North Africa and the Middle-East during the Ottoman period. She chairs, with Ulrike Freitag, the research field "Cities compared: cosmopolitanism in the Mediterranean and beyond," part of the EUME programme at the "Wissenschaftskolleg" Berlin think tank. She is co-founder and editor of "H-Mediterranean" (H-Net, Michigan State University). Nora Lafi is a significant expert in the following fields: History of the Ottoman Empire History of Libya, Tunisia and Algeria. What do you think? Human Rights - The Social Media Revolution 
Email us at: Quadriga@dw-world.de 
Our guests: 

Guido Baumhauer - After studying history and economics in Cologne and Washington and training at Deutsche Welle, he became a television correspondent in 1996 at DW's Brussels studio. There he worked as an administrative and technical manager of EU projects and pioneered work in Internet TV. He teaches at the University of Applied Sciences for Media and Communication and has been conducting seminars on the media for more than 10 years. As editor-in-chief, he made DW's internet presence one of the most diverse on the Net. Since January 1, 2006 he has been Director of Distribution for Strategy, Sales and Marketing at DW. Specialist journal "Cable & Satellite recently included him among the to 50 experts worldwide for broadband and pay TV. Baumhauer has also been appointed to the World Economic Forum's Global Agenda Council on the future of the media. 

Markus Beckedahl - Since 2002, Beckedahl has been blogging about politics in a digital society at netzpolitik.org, an award-winning blog widely read across the German-speaking parts of the world. He is also co-founder of "newthinking communications", a Berlin-based agency specializing in open-source strategies and digital culture. Beckedahl has been organizing re:publica's conferences on blogs, social media and digital society since 2007. He serves as an expert to the German parliament's Enquete Commission on Internet and Digital Society and is a member of the media council for the Berlin-Brandenburg Media Broadcasting Authority. Beckedahl also teaches as a college lecturer on digital media topics. 

Nora Lafi - is a French historian of Algerian origin, born near Marseilles. She is currently a researcher with the "Zentrum Moderner Orient" (ZMO) in Berlin. Lafi is a specialist on the history of the Ottman Empire, specifically of Arab settlements in North Africa and the Middle-East during the Ottoman period. She chairs, with Ulrike Freitag, the research field "Cities compared: cosmopolitanism in the Mediterranean and beyond," part of the EUME programme at the "Wissenschaftskolleg" Berlin think tank. She is co-founder and editor of "H-Mediterranean" (H-Net, Michigan State University). Nora Lafi is a significant expert in the following fields: History of the Ottoman Empire History of Libya, Tunisia and Algeria. Email us at: Quadriga@dw-world.de 
Our guests: 

Guido Baumhauer - After studying history and economics in Cologne and Washington and training at Deutsche Welle, he became a television correspondent in 1996 at DW's Brussels studio. There he worked as an administrative and technical manager of EU projects and pioneered work in Internet TV. He teaches at the University of Applied Sciences for Media and Communication and has been conducting seminars on the media for more than 10 years. As editor-in-chief, he made DW's internet presence one of the most diverse on the Net. Since January 1, 2006 he has been Director of Distribution for Strategy, Sales and Marketing at DW. Specialist journal "Cable & Satellite recently included him among the to 50 experts worldwide for broadband and pay TV. Baumhauer has also been appointed to the World Economic Forum's Global Agenda Council on the future of the media. 

Markus Beckedahl - Since 2002, Beckedahl has been blogging about politics in a digital society at netzpolitik.org, an award-winning blog widely read across the German-speaking parts of the world. He is also co-founder of "newthinking communications", a Berlin-based agency specializing in open-source strategies and digital culture. Beckedahl has been organizing re:publica's conferences on blogs, social media and digital society since 2007. He serves as an expert to the German parliament's Enquete Commission on Internet and Digital Society and is a member of the media council for the Berlin-Brandenburg Media Broadcasting Authority. Beckedahl also teaches as a college lecturer on digital media topics. 

Nora Lafi - is a French historian of Algerian origin, born near Marseilles. She is currently a researcher with the "Zentrum Moderner Orient" (ZMO) in Berlin. Lafi is a specialist on the history of the Ottman Empire, specifically of Arab settlements in North Africa and the Middle-East during the Ottoman period. She chairs, with Ulrike Freitag, the research field "Cities compared: cosmopolitanism in the Mediterranean and beyond," part of the EUME programme at the "Wissenschaftskolleg" Berlin think tank. She is co-founder and editor of "H-Mediterranean" (H-Net, Michigan State University). Nora Lafi is a significant expert in the following fields: History of the Ottoman Empire History of Libya, Tunisia and Algeria. Our guests: 

Guido Baumhauer - After studying history and economics in Cologne and Washington and training at Deutsche Welle, he became a television correspondent in 1996 at DW's Brussels studio. There he worked as an administrative and technical manager of EU projects and pioneered work in Internet TV. He teaches at the University of Applied Sciences for Media and Communication and has been conducting seminars on the media for more than 10 years. As editor-in-chief, he made DW's internet presence one of the most diverse on the Net. Since January 1, 2006 he has been Director of Distribution for Strategy, Sales and Marketing at DW. Specialist journal "Cable & Satellite recently included him among the to 50 experts worldwide for broadband and pay TV. Baumhauer has also been appointed to the World Economic Forum's Global Agenda Council on the future of the media. 

Markus Beckedahl - Since 2002, Beckedahl has been blogging about politics in a digital society at netzpolitik.org, an award-winning blog widely read across the German-speaking parts of the world. He is also co-founder of "newthinking communications", a Berlin-based agency specializing in open-source strategies and digital culture. Beckedahl has been organizing re:publica's conferences on blogs, social media and digital society since 2007. He serves as an expert to the German parliament's Enquete Commission on Internet and Digital Society and is a member of the media council for the Berlin-Brandenburg Media Broadcasting Authority. Beckedahl also teaches as a college lecturer on digital media topics. 

Nora Lafi - is a French historian of Algerian origin, born near Marseilles. She is currently a researcher with the "Zentrum Moderner Orient" (ZMO) in Berlin. Lafi is a specialist on the history of the Ottman Empire, specifically of Arab settlements in North Africa and the Middle-East during the Ottoman period. She chairs, with Ulrike Freitag, the research field "Cities compared: cosmopolitanism in the Mediterranean and beyond," part of the EUME programme at the "Wissenschaftskolleg" Berlin think tank. She is co-founder and editor of "H-Mediterranean" (H-Net, Michigan State University). Nora Lafi is a significant expert in the following fields: History of the Ottoman Empire History of Libya, Tunisia and Algeria. Guido Baumhauer - After studying history and economics in Cologne and Washington and training at Deutsche Welle, he became a television correspondent in 1996 at DW's Brussels studio. There he worked as an administrative and technical manager of EU projects and pioneered work in Internet TV. He teaches at the University of Applied Sciences for Media and Communication and has been conducting seminars on the media for more than 10 years. As editor-in-chief, he made DW's internet presence one of the most diverse on the Net. Since January 1, 2006 he has been Director of Distribution for Strategy, Sales and Marketing at DW. Specialist journal "Cable & Satellite recently included him among the to 50 experts worldwide for broadband and pay TV. Baumhauer has also been appointed to the World Economic Forum's Global Agenda Council on the future of the media. 

Markus Beckedahl - Since 2002, Beckedahl has been blogging about politics in a digital society at netzpolitik.org, an award-winning blog widely read across the German-speaking parts of the world. He is also co-founder of "newthinking communications", a Berlin-based agency specializing in open-source strategies and digital culture. Beckedahl has been organizing re:publica's conferences on blogs, social media and digital society since 2007. He serves as an expert to the German parliament's Enquete Commission on Internet and Digital Society and is a member of the media council for the Berlin-Brandenburg Media Broadcasting Authority. Beckedahl also teaches as a college lecturer on digital media topics. 

Nora Lafi - is a French historian of Algerian origin, born near Marseilles. She is currently a researcher with the "Zentrum Moderner Orient" (ZMO) in Berlin. Lafi is a specialist on the history of the Ottman Empire, specifically of Arab settlements in North Africa and the Middle-East during the Ottoman period. She chairs, with Ulrike Freitag, the research field "Cities compared: cosmopolitanism in the Mediterranean and beyond," part of the EUME programme at the "Wissenschaftskolleg" Berlin think tank. She is co-founder and editor of "H-Mediterranean" (H-Net, Michigan State University). Nora Lafi is a significant expert in the following fields: History of the Ottoman Empire History of Libya, Tunisia and Algeria. Markus Beckedahl - Since 2002, Beckedahl has been blogging about politics in a digital society at netzpolitik.org, an award-winning blog widely read across the German-speaking parts of the world. He is also co-founder of "newthinking communications", a Berlin-based agency specializing in open-source strategies and digital culture. Beckedahl has been organizing re:publica's conferences on blogs, social media and digital society since 2007. He serves as an expert to the German parliament's Enquete Commission on Internet and Digital Society and is a member of the media council for the Berlin-Brandenburg Media Broadcasting Authority. Beckedahl also teaches as a college lecturer on digital media topics. 

Nora Lafi - is a French historian of Algerian origin, born near Marseilles. She is currently a researcher with the "Zentrum Moderner Orient" (ZMO) in Berlin. Lafi is a specialist on the history of the Ottman Empire, specifically of Arab settlements in North Africa and the Middle-East during the Ottoman period. She chairs, with Ulrike Freitag, the research field "Cities compared: cosmopolitanism in the Mediterranean and beyond," part of the EUME programme at the "Wissenschaftskolleg" Berlin think tank. She is co-founder and editor of "H-Mediterranean" (H-Net, Michigan State University). Nora Lafi is a significant expert in the following fields: History of the Ottoman Empire History of Libya, Tunisia and Algeria. Nora Lafi - is a French historian of Algerian origin, born near Marseilles. She is currently a researcher with the "Zentrum Moderner Orient" (ZMO) in Berlin. Lafi is a specialist on the history of the Ottman Empire, specifically of Arab settlements in North Africa and the Middle-East during the Ottoman period. She chairs, with Ulrike Freitag, the research field "Cities compared: cosmopolitanism in the Mediterranean and beyond," part of the EUME programme at the "Wissenschaftskolleg" Berlin think tank. She is co-founder and editor of "H-Mediterranean" (H-Net, Michigan State University). Nora Lafi is a significant expert in the following fields: History of the Ottoman Empire History of Libya, Tunisia and Algeria.


Mohamed Higazy: 'Egypt is realizing its quest for democracy' The Egyptian government has faced Western criticism over its human rights record as it moves toward democracy. But Egypt's ambassador to Germany says that Cairo is upholding justice and ensuring freedom for its people. Ambassador Higazy, Western media quite often criticizes the current situation of the democratization process in Egypt. Some, including Deutsche Welle, argue that the overall situation is as bad or even worse than it was in the Mubarak-era. What is your answer to that? Mohamed Higazy: I do not subscribe to this. Egypt has been on its course towards democracy since June 30, 2013. It has committed itself to the stipulation of the road map. That means rewriting the constitution and organizing a referendum. The European Union and other institutions supervised the presidential elections. We are heading towards the third commitment of the roadmap: the parliamentary elections. Egypt is realizing its quest for democracy. But Human Rights Watch (HRW) recently published a report, which described the current situation as the "most dramatic reversal of human rights in Egypt's modern history under President Abdel Fattah el-Sissi." I don't think HRW worked with objectivity and I disagree with such a statement. Egypt is in a difficult transition process and is facing challenges from within by terrorist and jihadist groups in Northern Sinai. Egypt has to maintain law and order. But in doing so, it also respects the state of law. You mentioned the Sinai Peninsula. On October 24, more than 30 security forces were killed in Northern Sinai. In total, the number of victims on there has risen to several hundred. Is the government's policy really successful? The terrorist groups are threatening not only Egypt but the whole region. They turn the Middle East into a fragile and fragmented society where all the communities and minorities, in particular, will suffer. The war against [the terrorists] will not only protect regional but also international security – including Europe's security. Some estimate that at least 22,000 people have been imprisoned since July 2013. What about the state of human rights in Egypt? Egypt witnessed two peaceful popular revolutions on January 25, 2011 and on June 30, 2013, calling for freedom, social justice and human dignity. On June 30, 2013 around 30 million Egyptians went to the streets in their second revolution against a regime that attempted to establish a religious state and implemented serious measures which threatened the rule of law and aimed to secure power for its own party. The quest of the people was to have a modern democratic state. Concerning the figures you mentioned, they are by far exaggerated. I assure you that Egypt does not have any political prisoners. This week an Egyptian court ordered prominent activist Alaa Abdel-Fattah back to jail. He was arrested in November after a protest outside parliament against the law restricting demonstrations. Is that Egypt's way of silencing its opponents? If there is a law, then one must abide by it. It is a legal process and we in the executive are not allowed to comment on a legal process. However, I assure you that we trust the Egyptian judiciary system which has the mechanisms of appeal. The Egyptian judiciary system guarantees the accused and the defenders all rights. On October 26, 2014, a Cairo court sentenced 23 people to three years in prison for a peaceful demonstration on June 21 that challenged the law. Once more: would you call this a proper human rights record? Last week, Egypt received Mr. Stavros Lambrinidis, the European Union's special representative for human rights. We disclosed our whole system to him. The United Nations Human Rights Council [also assessed Egypt's human rights record using its mechanism - known as the Universal Periodic Review - last week]. H.E. Mr. Ibrahim El-Heneidy, minister of transitional justice, headed Egypt's delegation during that meeting. It discussed [the national report on] measures […] related to enhancing e.g. political, civil, economic, social and cultural rights. Our ultimate aim is to protect human rights. But there is also a law to be respected. Our law does not restrict demonstrations, but regulates them. And as you know, such regulatory procedures are common in many countries, including Western democracies, where notifications for demonstrations are required. And the right of peaceful demonstrations are guaranteed [by our law as well]. Any individual has the right to disagree with this law or others, but you have to try to modify it through peaceful and legal mechanisms. No country can exist without restoring law and order. These are the two principles Egypt is based upon. Again, Egypt is in a difficult political situation. It finds itself in a state of transition and is exerting effort to realize the goals of its revolution: freedom, democracy and social justice. Dr. Mohamed Abdelhamid Ibrahim Higazy is Egypt's ambassador to Germany.


Experts debate outcome of regime change, nation-building Seen from a global perspective nearly a decade after they occurred, the 9/11 terrorist attacks were not a seismic event that transformed the world, one expert says. Others say the response to 9/11 eroded social cohesion. Experts gathered Friday at the Heinrich-Böll Foundation headquarters in Berlin to discuss the decade that began with a massive terrorist attack on the United States and ended with a wave of revolutions in the Arab world. More specifically, they were there to discuss two ideas which apparently link the two momentous events, and which dominated Western foreign policy for the last decade: regime change and promoting democracy. Christoph Heusgen, a foreign policy advisor to German Chancellor Angela Merkel, challenged the idea that the decade had been only devastating and depressing. Though regime change had caused a lot of bloodshed, he argued there had been notable successes. The end of Saddam was the culmination of the West's policy regime change "We have to hold on to the fact that we have achieved a lot," he said. "In Afghanistan, we have a situation where the country is no longer under the terror regime of the Taliban. There were elections, the infrastructure is being built up. And Iraq, after the population endured incalculable suffering, is on the way to a more democratic and pluralistic society." Betrayed principles Claudia Roth, head of the opposition Greens party, however, took a different view of the events of the last 10 years. Using the examples of Guantanamo Bay and regional repression by China and Russia, she painted a bleak picture of how 9/11 and the "war on terror" has eroded social cohesion and allowed the West to compromise on its principles of human rights, democracy and the rule of law. "If security policy and human rights policy are not two sides of the same coin, then something has gone very wrong," she said. "I hope that now, the events in North Africa will bring about a change in strategy." Caroline Wadhams, senior fellow at the Center for American Progress in Washington, said this change is already starting to happen, courtesy of the US President Barack Obama's administration on the one hand - but also courtesy of the conservative Tea Party movement in the United States, which has a much more isolationist approach to foreign policy than former President George W. Bush. "There is a huge aversion - and you hear this language a lot in the US - we don't want to do nation-building," she explained. "After 2001 there was such a tremendous sense of power and arrogance about the possibilities of American power, and I think that's been largely sapped away now."  Obama has abandoned the rhetoric of the "war on terror"  9/11: A "brief blip" But perhaps the most thought-provoking contributions to the debate came from Ahmed Badawi, director of Berlin-based Transform, a center for conflict analysis, political development and world society research, who offered a Middle Eastern perspective on Western foreign policy. Badawi argued that the US rhetoric of promoting democracy began under Ronald Reagan in the 1980's - long before September 11, 2001. While democracy rhetoric may have helped the Republican president out-maneuver his political opponents in deciding US policy, that rhetoric has very little to do with today's reality in the Arab world, said Badawi.  The Arab Spring has forced massive changes in western foreign policy  "The Egyptians were receiving $1.3 billion (900 million euros) every year for military aid - the army that is ruling now," he said. "They were receiving only $60 million at the height of the push by the Bush administration to promote democracy, for civil society activities. "If we look back at September 11, say from the perspective of 20 years from now, or 30 years from now, we'll probably realize that it was nothing more than a brief blip," he said. If Wadhams' view that the US is weary of its attempts at nation-building proves correct and the wave of uprising taking place across the Middle East and North Africa lead to substantial, long-term political change, panelists entertained Badawi's assertion that 9/11 was nothing more than a "brief blip" in a much larger narrative could be true as well. But Badawi also admitted that the countless variables currently in flux in the Arab World make predicting the future very dangerous. Author: Ben Knight Editor: Sean Sinico


Mubarak's trial causes controversy in Egypt Former Egyptian president Hosni Mubarak will stand trial again. But after Saturday's adjournment, the question is when. Egyptians are following the legal procedures closely. Where did all the workmen come from, and above all: Why did they come? In early April, workmen entered the estate in Sharm el-Sheikh where Mubarak had lived and which has stood empty for two years. The workers refurbished the building, prompting an instant wave of rumors in Egypt, still politically a highly nervous country. There were speculations that the former president may be allowed to return to his villa to enjoy his remaining years there. Most Egyptians still begrudge him such a life of luxury. Those concerns later turned out to be unfounded. In the meantime, Egypt's Attorney General Talaat Abdullah had opened a new trial against Mubarak. The court will decide on possible misappropriation of state funds which were supposed to be used for the renovation of the presidential palace. They're comparably minor charges. But both legally and symbolically, these new charges are significant, because they guarantee one simple fact: Mubarak must stay in custody. He has spent the last two years in pre-trial custody because of separate unfinished trials. But Egyptian law says nobody can be kept in pre-trial custody for more than two years. Attorney General Talaat Abdullah made sure Mubarak remained in custody Responsible for death of 800 people At the same time, the new trial only marks the transition to another, in which a separate question will be dealt with that has considerably more weight: How much responsibility does Mubarak have for the death of some 800 Egyptians who were killed between January and July 2011 – the months of the Egyptian revolution? The court's ruling in the first trial was relatively mild. The judges called Mubarak guilty of not having complied with his duty of protection that came with his position as president. Mubarak was given a life sentence. But the court acquitted him of accusations which said he had known and approved of the mission orders that led to the protesters' deaths. That sentence was later annulled by an appeals court. Now it's down to the question of whether the court will allow new pieces of evidence to be brought forward. That decision will largely determine Mubarak's fate in the future. If the judges reject new pieces of evidence, the old ruling would probably be confirmed and be made final. But new pieces of evidence could mean that the protesters' deaths would be seen in a different light: that Mubarak knew of the mission orders, but didn't stop them. He would have implicitly approved of them, according to Göttingen-based lawyer Naseef Naeem. "That could mean the death penalty for him, instead of a life sentence," he added. But other observers say it's unlikely that he would draw a heavier sentence. Critics suspect political motivation Legal experts are skeptical of the new trial's legal basis. President Mohammed Morsi signed two constitutional declarations in 2012, said Naeem, an expert on the legal system in the Arab world. These declarations foresee that a fresh investigation be undertaken into all crimes connected to the protesters' death - if there is new evidence on the table. In November 2012, Morsi also passed a so-called law on the protection of the revolution. "The law explicitly states that new trials are to be held against all crimes committed by the state authorities during the Egyptian revolution of 2011 – even in cases where there have already been final rulings," explained Naeem. Egyptians protested against President Morsi on the second anniversary of Mubarak's resignation What troubles legal experts like Naeem is that the new trial might be politically motivated. "During his election campaign, Morsi promised a revision of the judgment passed against Mubarak. That's highly controversial in my view." Mubarak's fate now depends on whether or not the court will allow new pieces of evidence. Mubarak's lawyers have rejected them. Public prosecutors argue in favor of them, and base their demand on the revolution law passed by Morsi. End of an era Whatever the outcome of the trial, Mubarak's era is over. The second trial against the former president may still make some waves. But Egyptians today face different problems. The country's economy is in a disastrous situation. And the citizens can't agree on their country's political identity. While some want to turn Egypt into an Islamic state, others cling to its secular character. In this situation, explained legal expert Naeem, the upcoming trial loses some of its significance. "Whether the trial takes place or not won't change anything about Egypt's current problems," he said.


Human rights teetering on a knife edge, says Amnesty International Human rights activists are using new tools to challenge repression, says Amnesty International in its annual report. But the world community has to ensure lasting improvements on the threshold of historic change. On the eve of its 50th anniversary, Amnesty International (AI) has applauded the growing demands for freedom and justice across the Middle East and North Africa. In the organization's annual report "The State of the World's Human Rights," released Friday, AI said the protests highlighted people's deep desire for freedom from fear and want. "People are rejecting fear," said AI's Secretary General Salil Shetty. "Courageous people, led largely by youth, are standing up and speaking out in the face of bullets, beatings, tear gas and tanks." Yet despite these developments, freedom of expression was still under attack across the world. The governments in Libya, Syria, Bahrain and Yemen have shown how far they are willing to go in order to stay in power by beating, maiming or killing peaceful protestors, AI said. In addition, human rights violations are continuing out of the international spotlight. AI said thousands of human rights defenders were threatened, imprisoned, tortured and killed around the world, including in Afghanistan, Angola, Brazil, Burma, China, Mexico, Russia, Turkey, Uzbekistan, Vietnam and Zimbabwe. However, AI said 2010 also had "iconic moments": Aung San Suu Kyi's release from house arrest in Burma and the awarding of the Nobel Peace Prize to Chinese dissident Liu Xiaobo. The role of new media Shetty said 2010 marked a change in the fight for human rights. The use of the Internet and social media in opposing repressive governments showed that information was a source of power, he said.  Facebook played a key role in Tunisia's revolution "This bravery - combined with new technology that is helping activists to outflank and expose government suppression of free speech and peaceful protest - is sending a signal to repressive governments that their days are numbered," Shetty said. A battle is now underway for control of this access to information, AI said. Governments are struggling to control the means of communication and networking technology that is fueling this new activism. "Governments are scrambling to regain the initiative or to use this technology against activists," AI said. The international community's responsibility Even in countries undergoing political change, there are still human rights problems. In Egypt, for example, freedom of speech is still threatened following the ouster of president Hosni Mubarak. In mid-April, a law came into force which criminalized peaceful protests and strikes. "Germany, the EU and the US have to call on the Egyptian interim government and military council to take consistent concrete steps to improve the protection of human rights," said Wolfgang Grenz, Amnesty International's deputy secretary general for Germany. Nonetheless, Shetty said the changes in the Arab world have started a ball rolling which cannot be stopped. "Not since the end of the Cold War have so many repressive governments faced such a challenge to their stranglehold on power," he said. Human rights had become a universal demand. "The genie is out of the bottle and the forces of repression cannot put it back," Shetty said. He said it was crucial that the international community ensure lasting change. "We cannot allow the sacrifices of the thousands of people in the last few months to end up being a false dawn for the people of the Middle East and North Africa and indeed for the world." Author: Sabina Casagrande Editor: Rob Mudge


US, EU must adjust political, economic policies toward Egypt In many senses of the word, the revolution in Egypt is a game-changer. For the United States, its importance is geopolitical and military. For the European Union, the impact may be more about economics. For decades the US and its European allies have supported despots in the Middle East and in North Africa. America maintains a number of key military bases in the region, and the Europeans have been trying to establish closer ties with North Africa for 15 years along the lines of the 1995 Barcelona Declaration (Euro-Mediterranean Partnership on security and economic issues - ed.). The whole Arab world is of course vastly important to the West. But experts say Egypt is particularly significant. "I would say that Egypt is leading in the region, and the Americans know it," Mahdouh Habashi, a globalization critic and political activist, told Deutsche Welle. "It has to do with Egypt's geopolitical location. Even Napoleon, when he conquered Egypt in 1798, said ‘Egypt is the most important country in the world.' And of course he was talking in a geopolitical sense." Egypt was the lynchpin of American Middle East strategy. The Mubarak regime was seen as a guarantor for peace with Israel and access to the Suez Canal as well as an ally in the fight against radical Islamism. That was the reason that America followed the instability and revolution in Egypt with especially cautious and wary eyes. "The National Security Council was in permanent session, meeting and analyzing the situation in Egypt every day," Habashi said. "That shows how important the country was in their plans. And ordinary Egyptians at the demonstrations noticed this as well. When they became aware of the reactions world-wide, they said, 'Boy, Mubarak sold us really cheaply. We are somebody.'" Post-revolutionary governments in Egypt and elsewhere may well begin to demand more in return for cooperating with the West. In particular, they could insist upon a more level playing field between their countries and the US and the EU. Opportunities and challenges  The West has geopolitical interests including access to the Suez Canal From a European perspective, a more democratic Egypt could dovetail well with the bloc's long-term strategy in the region. "Since the Barcelona Declaration in 1995, the EU has tried to encourage broader political participation, fairer economic distribution among the populace, legal migration policies and respect for human rights," Sonja Hegazy, an Egypt expert at the Modern Orient Center in Berlin, told Deutsche Welle. "But the EU had no partner to deal with, and the Barcelona process didn't work. But now with a democratically elected government, it may be possible to realize these four goals." But greater cooperation with Egypt and other countries in the region will also come at a price. One thing the EU may have to change is agricultural policies. "Everyone who's worked on this for the last 15 years says limits have to be put on the European agricultural lobby," Hegazy said. "If we want to create an exchange based on equality, then there has to be free access to European markets for North African agricultural products." That would likely not sit well with farmers' lobby groups whose interests are always well-represented in Brussels. Attitude adjustments  Countries like Egypt will want an end to European agricultural protectionism  Egyptians who live in Europe are among those calling for a fundamental rethink of how the EU treats societies in the Arab World and North Africa. One of them is Magdi Gawhary, a Middle East expert and author who has spent more than 50 years in Germany. "The West has to learn how to treat people as equals and how to deal with democracies in so-called Third World countries," Gawhary told Deutsche Welle. "The West has to choose between balancing everyone's interests or suspending the normal rules of the market when it comes to oil. That's what happened now when it's about oil. It's a double standard, and that's why the despots were needed." Despite spending most of his life in Germany, Gawhary returned to his native land when the protests broke out. He spent 17 days together with the demonstrators in Tahrir Square in downtown Cairo. "I tried to use my strengths and argue that the West should help Egyptians under the NATO doctrine that energy, resources and transport routes must be secure," Gawhary said. "That applies to the Suez Canal, but they said they weren't interested. And here we see what's so wonderful about this development. It was the Egyptians themselves, and only them, who made it happen." Politically, economically and in terms of general attitude - these are three areas in which the West is going to have to adapt to the new Egyptian realities. Author: Bettina Marx (jc) Editor: Rob Mudge


Police brutality in Egypt back in the spotlight As the third anniversary of Egypt's revolution approaches, key reforms have yet to be implemented. One demand was to rein in the security forces, but there is little sign of that as the crackdown on protesters continues. In a hazy video posted online, a man lays blindfolded on the floor, shirtless, and shrieking in pain. His bare back and arms are beaten red. "I was arrested by mistake, by God I swear I am innocent," he screams as he contorts his body while he is whipped multiple times with a leather belt. The abuser, whose face is not shown, demands the man admit he is a woman. Purportedly the beating of a suspect in custody inside a police station in Egypt's Minya province, the video which has circulated on social media in the past weeks has once again brought the brutality of the country's police back into the spotlight. Nearly three years after Egyptians took to the streets on January 25, 2011, activists say Egypt's security forces remain unreformed. And now, with increased public support for the security forces amid a crackdown on protests, many fear police are working with a blank check. Police reform was one of the key demands of the Egyptian revolution, which began on Police Day, January 25th, 2011, and with the election of the country's first democratically elected president Mohamed Morsi, many hoped reform would take place. But as his term progressed, the former Islamist president failed to undertake comprehensive reform, and opponents continued to take to the streets. In March, following public outcry over a violent response from security forces to anti-government protests, Morsi further enraged activists when he praised police and warned officers who were also protesting his rule against breaking ranks. "This country loves you, hugs you and protects you, and always expects from you courage and sacrifice," he said, as Interior Minister Mohamed Ibrahim, whose ministry controls all of the country's police forces including state security and riot police, stood by his side, adding that the police "were at the heart" of the January 25 revolution. "Almighty God willed that January 25 also be Police Day, a day of remembering the sacrifices of the police," he said. In speeches made in the final days before his ouster, Morsi continued to praise security forces and his interior minister. Now, as a bloody security crackdown on his supporters has taken hold, Islamists have condemned their tactics. Key demand Samy says nothing has been done to rein in the police "It's the first demand of the revolution, the first one for us," Mohamed Samy, an activist who was recently released from jail, told DW as he sat with a friend on a break from his work at a mobile store in Cairo. "When Morsi came, he didn't try to reform the police, he only tried to make them work for his group, for the Muslim Brotherhood, so it got worse," he said. Samy, who fought against Mubarak, the military, and then against Morsi, was arrested last month in one of the first implementations of a controversial new protest law that requires protesters to obtain permission from the interior ministry to stage demonstrations. Protesters had gathered to voice their outrage against a clause in the draft constitution that allows for military trials for civilians in front of the Shura Council, Egypt's parliament. Police fired water cannons and began beating and arresting protesters. Hearing and then seeing that women protesters had been beaten, arrested and sexually assaulted by police, Samy says he ran to help friends but was picked up by plain-clothes police, beaten, thrown into a van, and taken to a police station where protesters were again beaten. Samy and 22 other protesters spent a week in jail before they were released on bail last Thursday pending trial. Another detainee, who was not protesting, but was caught up in the violence while attempting to go to work, remains in jail. According to the women who were arrested and multiple eye-witnesses, the female detainees were released that night by being dumped in the desert outside of Cairo, although the interior ministry has denied it. "The police don't like the results of what the revolution has done to activists and to the people, so they are back stronger than before," said Samy, whose cousin Gaber "Gika" Saleh, a member of the April 6 Youth movement, was the first protester to die during the rule of Morsi after he was shot by police in November 2012. The morning before Samy's arrest during the protests at the Shura Council, he was at a memorial for his cousin, who just one week earlier had been declared a martyr of the revolution by the government. That memorial was also violently dispersed by police. Different day, same treatment Activists have little hope that their treatment at the hands of the police will improve "There is not any kind of new way of treating us. This is the usual, it's all the same," said Amr Adel, a 25 year old activist who was also beaten and arrested last month at the protest in front of the Shura Council. Adel was held for 15 hours before being released. "One of the officers arresting me said 'I'm going to kill you,'" Adel told DW. "They are acting with a vengeance and I don't know how they are going to treat us in the future." Now activists like Adel say police reform under the new military-backed regime is even more unlikely. And analysts too say articles in the new draft constitution that is set to go to a vote in January will make any future attempt to rein in security forces difficult. One clause sets up a Supreme Police Council, which analysts say will likely be dominated by senior officers, and must be consulted on any law affecting the police, ensuring that security reform will run through existing police institutions. Another article stipulates that general intelligence officers will be subject to military courts, not civilian courts, effectively providing them with immunity from civilian oversight or prosecution. But officials say they are working to improve security forces. In an interview with Egyptian television CBC at the end of August, Interior MInister Mohamed Ibrahim, who was appointed by Morsi but retained his position following the former president's ouster, said he hoped to be able to "transform the Ministry of Interior into a foundational entity that does not change according to the political regime by any means." He also said that no political activists would be pursued unless they break the law. No accountability Beyond reform, many activists complain that no one has been held accountable for past abuses and police continue their crackdown with impunity. In the few cases where police have been put on trial for killings and torture, nearly all have resulted in acquittals or lenient sentences. Beaten, but not cowed Last week, 13 Egyptian and international organizations called on the authorities to acknowledge and investigate the killings of up to 1,000 people by security forces during the dispersal of the Rabaa al-Adawiya and al-Nahda square pro-Morsi sit-ins on August 14. The military-backed government has yet to publically document the events, the bloodiest in decades, and the office of the public prosecutor has never investigated or held any members of security forces to account for what the rights groups called excessive and unjustified use of lethal force. "I can assure you, we have never, as police, pointed a firearm at the chest of any protester," said Mohamed Ibrahim, after 95 protesters and one police officer died on July 27 on a street near the Rabaa al-Adawiya pro-Morsi protest camp. And in a news conference on August 14, the day the Rabaa al-Adawiya and al-Nahda protest camps were cleared, he said that his ministry had successfully dispersed the two sit-ins "without losses." While fears that police brutality is increasing and now spreading beyond Islamists to any critic of the military-backed regime, activists say it is happening with the consent of the general public, stoked by pro-regime state and private media. When Morsi was ousted on July 3, protesters were seen hoisting police officers on their shoulders, carrying them into Tahrir square in celebration. Activists say it has invigorated the security forces and given them a blank check. "They were afraid of us before, but now, they have support from the people because the media is saying there is a war against terrorism," said Samy. "They are stronger than before the revolution and regular people will do nothing." Despite everything, Samy and others say police tactics will not silence them or deter them from taking to the streets to achieve the revolution's goal and get justice for those killed. "I won't stop. I will continue for my country, I will continue for Gika," he said.


Focus: Abeer Saady In Cairo Abeer Saady is the Vice Chair of the Egyptian Press Syndicate. Since the revolution last year she's been keen to help reform her country's media system. Abeer Saady is in Berlin taking part in a one-week DW Akademie workshop together with ten Egyptian media officials and editors-in-chief. The workshop focuses on media self-regulation in Germany. A follow-up seminar in Cairo this April plans to work out a possible road map for media self-regulation in Egypt.   What has surprised you the most so far? The fact that German president Christian Wulff had resigned. I feel this is positive because our former president, Hosni Mubarak, only resigned after many people had died. It's been interesting to see this kind of self-regulation and the role of the German media.  What are you learning in the workshop? We've been introduced to the German system of media self-regulation. This doesn't mean we're going to adopt the same system, or copy and paste it, but we'll consider all options and create our own self-regulation system, adapted to Egyptian needs. I must say, everyone here has been very welcoming, inspiring and helpful.  What are you personally gaining from the workshop? Abeer Saady, panel discussion at the Hertie School of Governance I took part in a panel discussion on the role of media, education and civil society following the Arab Spring and had the chance to listen to German students - a rare opportunity for me. I was able to learn how the students - the young generation in Germany - think about the Arab region and their opinions about social media and its role in society.  How is the atmosphere within the group? I am the only woman in the delegation. That's not unusual for me because in the press syndicate back in Cairo I'm also the only female. I've become used to this and am comfortable with it.  What is the first thing you’ll do after the workshop finishes? Egyptian delegation at the German Press Council I'll talk to my colleagues about my experiences in Germany and show them what I've learned. I'll also raise discussions on how we're going to create our own media self-regulation system. On a personal note, when I get back I'll buy a nice present for my mother because in Egypt, March 21st is Mother's Day.  The DW Akademie to me is … … a prestigious academy. I hope we'll cooperate in training projects in the near future. Our journalists want to be part of our country's democratic transformation. It's either now or never, and we do need more journalistic training.


Our activists views on civic reform What role does civic reform play in a democracy? Is civic reform - and ultimately- democracy possible without revolutions and uprisings? Egyptian opposition politician Amr Badr


The spirit of Tahrir, the spirit of social entrepreneurship We mark the first anniversary of the Egyptian revolution by hearing from the people who made it happen. Also on the show: the Syrian protester whose injuries gave him away and a global look at social entrepreneurship.


Egypt caught between a rock and a hard place Israel and Hamas have agreed on a ceasefire - based on an Egyptian-brokered deal. While the government in Cairo has turned increasingly against Hamas, public opinion still very much supports the Palestinian cause. When Egyptian activists organized an aid convoy to Gaza last month, their challenge took on political dimensions. When the convoy of more than 500 activists, 11 buses and 2.3 million Egyptian pounds ($320,000) of medical aid cruised into a government checkpoint near the city of Arish in North Sinai, scuffles with army personnel broke out and it was turned back to Cairo. The government cited security concerns, but for the activists, it was political. "The government showed its real stance when we were stopped from delivering medical aid," Ibrahim Ahmed, a 19-year-old student at the American University of Cairo who helped organize the convoy, told DW. "It's not about Hamas, or about politics, or religion. We are talking about people who are dying and need medication, so why stop us?" Since the onslaught of the war in Gaza, the Egyptian government has effectively aligned with Israel in a fight against Hamas, an offshoot of the Muslim Brotherhood. But in a country where support for the Palestinian cause has long been entrenched in the minds of the population, some say it is becoming increasingly difficult for Egypt to balance the government's antipathy toward Hamas. "It's very clear to us on the outside that there is a convergence of interest between Egypt and Israel," Khaled Elgindy, a former adviser to Palestinian negotiators who is now a fellow at the Brookings Institution in Washington, told DW. "But obviously, that is not how it is being projected domestically." Pressure on Palestinians Egypt has long been seen as a regional leader and mediator in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, but with the ouster of former President Mohamed Morsi, a close ally of Hamas, a fierce campaign against the Palestinian group has been waged. "Thank god Egypt is with us now. It would not be possible to meet the targets of this invasion without their cooperation," said Israeli Intelligence Minister Yuval Steinitz in an interview with Israeli television the day the ground invasion in Gaza began. Egypt has cracked down on the supply route to Gaza Over the past year, Egypt has destroyed tunnels that served as a lifeline for Gaza and used the courts to implicate Hamas in plots against the state. With the exception of a few humanitarian cases, President Abdel Fattah el-Sissi has kept the border crossing with the enclave closed during the past month of fighting, exacerbating the humanitarian crisis. With images of dead civilians flooding out of Gaza combined with the fact that Israelis have been very open about their pleasure with Egypt, Elgindy said el-Sissi is in a "very precarious place." "They can get away with this narrative in Israel and the US for a very long time that this is Hamas' fault, that they are destabilizing Egypt, that if only they would accept our wonderful ceasefire there wouldn't be this tragedy," said Elgindy. "But I don't think that narrative can hold in Egypt for very long." Bigger cause Other experts agree. "It is a cause that is bigger than Hamas, bigger than the Palestinians, it's an Arab cause, a Muslim cause, and it is one that has also been used by leaders to deflect attention locally," Fadi Elsalameen, political commentator and fellow at the American Security Project, told DW. A cause that unites all Arabs But while support for Palestinians has been engrained in Egyptian minds, this time it has been harder to gauge public opinion. Unlike in major cities in Europe and the US, there were fewer protests in Egypt amid a shrinking space for public dissent. "Whenever I talk to someone about having a protest in front of the Israeli embassy, they all say the same answer, 'having a protest is like suicide,' because you have the new protest which is sending people to jail," said Ahmed, the student who helped with the aid convoy. The Palestinian cause has long been seen as a rallying point for Egyptian discontent with the government. Prior to the country's 2011 revolution, many activists say it enabled the political opposition to organize itself, thus becoming a threat to the state. "They want to control the messaging, and they don't want this to be a source of public dissent or something which people can mobilize around," said Elgindy. "This is one of the reasons the government turned the convoy back." As the death toll continues to surge, balancing the government's loathing of political Islam with the citizens' sympathy for the Palestinian cause is a task that is growing ever more challenging for el-Sissi. "Every day that goes by it becomes harder to maintain the official narrative of blaming Hamas, and they have to decide whether the costs of losing credibility as a key regional player and supporter of the Palestinians begin to outweigh the benefits of crushing Hamas," said Elgindy. Subtle shift In recent days, the government has begun showing signs of a shift. On Friday, Egypt's Foreign Ministry condemned the indiscriminate targeting of civilians after at least 25 people were killed following Israeli shelling of the southern town of Rafah in Gaza. The Rafah border crossing is a hotspot in the conflict Then, having previously refused to revise their original ceasefire proposal despite its failure, Egypt announced renewed mediation efforts. On Monday night, Hamas and Israel announced they would agree to the terms of Egypt's proposed 72-hour ceasefire. The new agreement proposes that delegations from all sides then attend further talks in Cairo. While it remains to be seen if the agreement will hold, it marks a significant shift in strained relations between Cairo and the Palestinian factions. "The regime was silent for the first several weeks and now they just started criticizing Israel, calling them atrocities, the usual rhetoric," said Elgindy. "But at the same time, just by saying those words, it raises a certain expectation in the public that if you call those things atrocities, it's now not just Hamas to blame, it's now both sides, so now you have to do something about it."


Egypt's Muslim Brotherhood biding its time They have been branded terrorists by the government and their top leaders have been thrown in jail. Hundreds face mass executions, thousands have been killed at protests or languish in Egyptian prison cells. One year after Egypt's military deposed Mohamed Morsi, the country's first Muslim Brotherhood president, members of the Islamist group say they have shifted their focus to resisting the government of president Abdel Fattah el-Sissi, the former army strongman who led the military coup. And as a bitter, protracted confrontation has caused many to doubt the government's ability to control the group, it has also raised fears of continual civil strife. "If you say to the families of those who lost their brothers, sisters, fathers, and friends, if you just tell them that we are going to forget what happened to your families, it will just turn into violence," a 20-year-old Muslim Brotherhood supporter, who wished to remain anonymous for fear of reprisals, told DW. "There is no possibility of reconciliation with the government. There is no other choice but to keep on with the struggle." The group has always faced repression at the hands of authoritarian regimes in Egypt, but, unlike ever before, analysts say Brotherhood members have taken a conscious decision to fight back. "What we've seen in the past year is this confrontational approach, where their strategy is essentially protest, protest, protest, make Egypt ungovernable, maybe even direct economic sabotage," Shadi Hamid, a fellow at the Brookings Institution in Washington, DC and the author of "Temptations of Power," a new book on Islamists movements, told DW. "They have no incentive to see el-Sissi improve the economy and they stand to gain quite a bit if the economy continues to suffer." "I believe that the Egyptian people will remove him (el-Sissi - the ed.) with these kinds of demonstrations every day," said London-based Mohammed Soudan, the foreign relations secretary of the Freedom and Justice Party, the political wing of the Muslim Brotherhood. "El-Sissi has a lot of challenges, especially the economy and security, and he thinks he can do it with force, but that's not the way to rule a country with 90 million people." Missing strategy Many of the group's older leaders like Soudan managed to evade arrest and fled Egypt, setting up Brotherhood headquarters in countries like the United Kingdom, Turkey and Qatar, but have failed to provide a viable alternative. The Muslim Brotherhood is struggling to find a way back "I think that the Brotherhood leadership in exile has really struggled to come up with a coherent strategy or vision beyond protests, beyond confrontation," said Hamid. "When you ask a Brotherhood leader how they really envision the military to be displaced from power, there isn't really an answer to that." A gap among the older Brotherhood leaders and younger supporters on the ground in Egypt has also begun to emerge. "Some of the older leaders have lost credibility," said the 20-year-old supporter who asked to remain unnamed. "Their generation didn't even dream of a revolution, or freedom, their only prospect was how to live with the corruption, the crackdowns and so on." The idea of a revolution has clearly resonated with youth on the ground. "The Brotherhood historically doesn't do revolution, they do gradualism, the long game and has also been careful about making an enemy out of the state," said Hamid. "But the language that you hear now, not just opposition to the military, but opposition to all the state institutions, the judiciary, shows a fundamental loss of faith in the very idea that the Egyptian state can play a constructive role anytime in the foreseeable future." The group has repeatedly said they are committed to a non-violent struggle, but members admit there are sympathizers and supporters who are not under their control and the ongoing repression could push them toward violence. The threat has become ever more pressing as prospects for reconciliation seem bleak. Evil personifed? Despite the fact that the Brotherhood has staged weekly protests and drawn on support from hundreds of thousands of members and millions of supporters and sympathizers across Egypt, large numbers of Egyptians grew disenchanted with the Islamist group following its tumultuous year in power. At the time of Morsi's deposal, the former president's popularity hit an all-time low and army intervention came on the heels of massive street protests with numbers never seen before. "[The Brotherhood] has become, in the Egyptian's elite's view and the general public's view, the personification of evil," Amro Ali, a Middle East analyst based between Alexandria and Sydney, Australia, told DW. "So the problem is, when you lose legitimacy to this degree, it makes it really hard to reconstitute yourself." El-Sissi has consolidated his power for now Many Egyptians are now cheering the crackdown. "You can compare how the group was viewed by the public during Mubarak, when people were very weary toward the Brotherhood, but people would say that at least they bring social services to the poor," said Ali. "But now, it's almost an outright hostility toward the Brotherhood and that's partly from their own undoing, from breaking promises, from being extremely exclusive during their year in rule." Waiting in the wings And some who opposed Muslim Brotherhood rule but also opposed the military rule now fear the violent crackdown could lead to a whitewashing of the Brotherhood's failures while in power. "Until August 14, their situation was that no one wanted them, no one needed them, they had power and lost it," said Wael Eskandar, an Egyptian independent journalist who opposed both Brotherhood rule and military rule, speaking of the violent dispersals of pro-Morsi sit-ins in Cairo that left hundreds dead. "Then what happened, the most brutal of all incidents in recent history, where a lot of innocent people were killed, that gave the group a lifeline, and once again they were reborn as victims, which they thrive on." Because of this, Eskandar said he believes that the group has a strong chance of coming back to power. "As the regime continues its brutality, people will eventually forget the year of Brotherhood rule, just like they forgot the year and a half of SCAF's (Supreme Council of the Armed Forces - the ed.) rule, and they will eventually join them as the only organized opposition to the brutality of the military regime," he said. "Everything in Egypt as we've seen has the ability to be washed away, even Mubarak, even the state security crimes." "They will just be looking for someone to let them out of this mess."


Egypt gripped by unemployment Egyptians were hoping for a better future when they ran former President Hosni Mubarak out of office. Instead, the nation's economy has hit rock-bottom. And many Egyptians are desperate for a job. Huda has no idea how things are supposed to go on. The young archeologist works several jobs just to stay afloat. She teaches a class on early Egyptian history at a university; she translates texts from English for a company; and she guides tourists through her country - when they come, anyway. But that happens much less often than in the past. There are many Egyptians just like Huda. They jump back and forth between jobs, taking this one, or that - happy to be able to earn some money. Officially, unemployment has risen to 12.5 percent, but it likely hasn't peaked yet, economist Ahmed Kamaly, of the American University in Cairo, told DW. Quite the opposite, he fears, saying that the unstable political situation negatively affects the employment market and will continue to add to unemployment. No money Just less than two and a half years after the overthrow of Mubarak, Egypt is experiencing an economic depression. Foreign investors have left the country, taking their money with them: for 2011 alone, the Egyptian Central Bank recorded a decrease of $418 million (325 million euros) in direct investments. In addition, portfolio investors have divested themselves of $3.3 billion in value. A drastic currency decline also contributes to the poor economic situation. Many Egyptians cannot even pay for basic food items To put a halt to it and ensure the import of essential goods, the Central Bank has already spent over half of its dollar reserves. Still, many Egyptians can barely pay for food staples such as rice, potatoes and other vegetables. Many people can no longer pay for electricity and gasoline. The result: over a quarter of the Egyptian national budget is spent on public assistance benefits. In this kind of situation, more and more Egyptians have to worry about their jobs. Engineer and entrepreneur Alaa Badawi has had to let many of his employees go, he said. He works in a sector that provides services that are particularly important during the hot Egyptian summer: ventilation and cooling technology. Business was good, up until the revolution in 2011. Badawi's company once employed 70 people, but now the number is only 30 because he says he cannot afford any more. Flawed educational system One used to be able to make a decent living selling cooling units in Egypt The decline of the Egyptian pound has had the hardest impact on his business, said Badawi. "That makes everything more expensive for me, so I have to cut on the labor - I have to cut salaries; I have to dismiss a lot of employees," he explained. Only 10 of his remaining employees have a fixed contract. The rest works on a month-by-month basis. Badawi said he's not pleased with the situation, but doesn't see much of an alternative. The reasons for the current disastrous situation stretch way back. For decades, explained Kamaly, the government neglected to modernize the Egyptian education system. Though the economy boomed under Mubarak for a long time and could boast growth, it did not suffice to prompt significant improvement in the employment market. "The main source of unemployment is a mismatch between the qualification of the labor force and the qualification and skills needs needed in the different job offerings in Egypt," said Kamaly. That means that many good positions have not even been able to be filled - at least, not with local residents. The banking sector, for instance, is in desperate need of qualified staff, but cannot find them. "A significant percentage - they're not Egyptians," Kamaly said. Many people, but few jobs in Cairo Discouraging environment Egypt's entrepreneurs not only have to contend with past failures, but also with the challenges of the present. The current government is not exactly sending encouraging signs, Kamaly pointed out. While the previous government mainly placed its bets on privatization, the current one is adopting the opposite course and reclaiming companies back into the public sector. "That gives a bad signal to investors," the economist believes. For Kamaly, the primary challenges therefore do not lie in the economic area. "The economy is a symptom," he noted. The real problems are of a different nature. "It's the high level of uncertainty and the lack of experience in key Egyptian officials. Definitely this is affecting the economy." Leaving Egypt? How are things to continue for Egypt and its people? The country cannot continue to stay its course, said Badawi. Egypt has taken on a great deal of debt in the past few years. But that's not the way for the country to solve its problems, he said. "Egypt should focus internally in the coming few years on bettering the country infrastructure, bettering the education, bettering the health care, rather than taking loans from abroad," he said, but noted that since that takes time, timelines of 10 or 20 years would be helpful. But Huda, the young archeologist, doesn't want to wait that long. She's considering her alternatives - like leaving Egypt and trying her luck elsewhere.


In Cairo, trial resumes against Morsi and Muslim Brotherhood members Mohammed Morsi has arrived in Cairo for the start of his trial on charges of a prison break during Egypt's 2011 revolution. He stands accused alongside 129 other people. On Tuesday, the third anniversary of the breakout, the state news agency MENA reported that former President Morsi flew by helicopter from Borg al-Arab prison in Alexandria. One hundred and ten of his co-defendants, including members of the Palestinian militant group Hamas and Lebanon's Hezbollah, remain on the run. Authorities accuse Morsi and the other defendants of plotting to "destroy the Egyptian state and its institutions," conspiring with the foreign groups who infiltrated the country through Gaza during the 2011 revolution and using the turmoil to organize the prison breaks. The case has its roots in the 2011 escape of more than 20,000 inmates from Egyptian prisons, including Morsi and other Brotherhood members, during the early days of the 18-day uprising against then-President Hosni Mubarak. The prosecutors said more than 800 foreign fighters entered Egypt through Gaza to take part in storming of three prisons and killed a number of police officers and inmates. 'Denigrating' the Brotherhood On Tuesday Morsi appeared in court for just the second time since Egypt's popularly backed July 3 military coup. Morsi, whose rule had lasted just one year, missed a January 8 hearing in another trial after security officials said bad weather grounded a helicopter meant to bring him. A heavy security presence stood guard Tuesday as Morsi arrived at the police academy complex in eastern Cairo where he will stand trial. State television showed footage from inside the courtroom, the first live airing of proceedings against Morsi and Brotherhood. A lawyer representing the Muslim Brotherhood has said the trial appears aimed at "denigrating" Morsi and the movement. Multiple charges Morsi also faces charges in three other trials. Only one of those, in which he stands accused of inciting the murder of his opponents while in office, has begun, and he is expected to appear for that on Saturday. Many of the charges he faces carry the death sentence. In his previous appearance, Morsi insisted that he remained the country's legitimate president and challenged the legitimacy of the court, regularly interrupting the judges and prosecutors. In preparation for the Tuesday trial, authorities put up a glass window over the metal cage typically used to house defendants, apparently to stifle any disruptions. Egypt's caretaker regime has listed the Muslim Brotherhood as a terrorist organization and initiated a broad crackdown on the group. The interim government ordered the arrest of hundreds of senior officials of the Muslim Brotherhood since the July coup. Crackdowns on protests have led to the deaths of more than 1,000 of the movement's supporters. Insult to injury On Monday, MENA reported that Field Marshal Abdel Fattah el-Sissi, the head of the military and leader of the coup against Morsi, could officially announce his intention to stand in forthcoming presidential elections, expected by the end of April. According to MENA, the Supreme Council of the Armed Forces "unanimously delegated" him to run during a meeting. The former general may stand in the elections. His endorsement by military leaders came on the same day he was promoted to the rank of field marshal by acting President Adly Mansour. On Tuesday, media reported that gunmen killed a senior police officer as he left his home in the Haram district of Giza, a Cairo neighborhood. Major General Mohammed El-Said led the Interior Ministry's technical branch, in charge of the police. The TV report did not elaborate. mkg/kms (Reuters, AFP, dpa, AP)


Egypt extend voting one more day amid low turnout on second day of presidential elections With just a few hours left to vote, Egyptian officials have announced that polling stations will remain open an additional day. The move is seen as a reaction to low voter turnout. Egyptian officials worked to lure reluctant voters to the polls on the second and what had been scheduled to be the final day of voting. In addition to declaring Tuesday a government holiday, they also said that polling stations would remain open through Wednesday. Voter turnout figures were not immediately available on Tuesday. However, news agency AFP cited the Egyptian ministry as saying that only 16 million people – or roughly 29.7 percent of eligible voters - had cast ballots for the country's next president. The vote pits ex-army chief Abdel-Fattah el-Sissi against leftist politician Hamdeen Sabahi. The military leader, who led the coup that deposed Egypt's first democratically elected president, Mohammed Morsi last year, is widely expected to win the presidency. The Muslim Brotherhood, which had backed Morsi, boycotted the polls on Tuesday, calling into question their legality. Dissidents who backed Egypt's 2011 revolution also refused to cast ballots, expressing fears that formally installing el-Sissi will lead to another era of autocratic rule in Egypt. The military and police have been heavily deployed to secure polling stations during the vote following months of violence, which the military-backed government has blamed on Morsi's now-outlawed Muslim Brotherhood. The polls mark more than three years of political turmoil that has seen two presidents ousted following mass protests. More than a thousand people have been killed since the crackdown in July with around 15,000 protestors, many Brotherhood supporters, arrested. Final results are expected to be officially announced on June 5. kms/jm (AFP, dpa)


Egypt in the throes of el-Sissi cult The residents of Cairo's Gamaliya district are very proud of former Egyptian army chief and presidential candidate, Abdel Fattah el-Sissi. He grew up there, but remains a stranger to many of his old companions. Abdel Fattah el-Sissi is everywhere in the labyrinth of streets in Gamaliya, even though Egypt's former military chief and most likely-to-succeed presidential candidate moved out of the historical quarter in the heart of Cairo a long time ago. Posters of him in a suit or in an army uniform hang on every second house front. They decorate centuries-old mosques as well as the windows of souvenir shops and tiny markets in the side streets. “I love el-Sissi because he's a son of my neighborhood,” says the owner of a small shop. The song “Teslam el Ayadi”, which praises the army and is el-Sissi's unofficial election campaign song, comes out of the speakers of his shop. “And he has also freed our country from terrorists and extremists. With God's help he will continue to protect us.” Pious and diligent A few streets away Atef El Zaabalawi sits in a café used as campaign office. He tells anecdotes about el-Sissi's childhood. El Zaabalawi was born in the same year as the popular presidential candidate. Now, he works as an organizer for “Kamel Gamilek” a group of volunteers who work at the grass roots level for el-Sissi. Election campaigner El Zaabawali raves about el-Sissi's zeal In the Gamaliya dcistrict, the el-Sissi family is known for its discipline, zeal and resulting wealth. “As kids when we were playing soccer in the streets, Sissi only watched us from his home, he never played with us,” said El Zaabalawi. “That was their style. They were totally focused on school and work.” The 60-year old is convinced that if el-Sissi wins the elections at the end of May he will solve the country's problem with the same diligence. Zaabawali said that a second characteristic of the family was piety: “Every Friday, Sissi went to the mosque to listen to the sermons of the scholar Metwalli El Shaarawi.” In a recent TV interview, el-Sissi confirmed that the conservative preacher had significantly influenced his world view. Citations from the Koran and quick prayers are an inherent part of el-Sissi's speeches. With those he also persuades conservative voters. What has Morsi achieved? The inconspicuous apartment block in which el-Sissi spent a large part of his childhood is just a stone's throw away from the café where they now campaign for him. Despite one poster on a balcony nothing suggests that the presidential candidate once lived there. Egypt's El-Sissi is seen by many as the man who can save the country A few cats rummage through the trash for food on the dusty path leading to the apartment block. An old man slowly rides by on his donkey. The el-Sissi family moved out years ago when their son began his career at the military academy. Only a few relatives still live here. They don't want to talk about the presidential candidate. They are tired of the media hype and fear for their safety. This hasn't harmed el-Sissi's popularity in the area. A vendor, who works in the Khan El Khalili tourist bazaar close by, says that el-Sissi has given Egypt new pride by removing Islamist President Mohammed Morsi. He hasn't had any foreign customers in months, but he is convinced that with a military man as the new head of state the tourists will come back. “There is no alternative to military rule. They have the right perspective. What has Morsi, a civilian, achieved? Nothing.” A conspiracy, not a revolution The election campaigner Atef El Zaabawali also advertises el-Sissi as a bulwark against Islamists. The only challenger of the former army chief, left-wing revolutionary Hamdin Sabbahi, is seen as lacking the necessary toughness. El Zaabawali reduces the manifold problems of the country to a lack of security. And if security is restored all the other problems will vanish: the economic crisis, the absence of tourists and the high unemployment. He does not think much of the revolutionaries' demands for reforms, more transparency and anti-corruption measures. He claims that the uprising against Hosni Mubarak was controlled from abroad in cooperation with the Islamists. “Why did we have a revolution? Because the Muslim Brotherhood wanted it. The events of January 25, 2011, were a conspiracy against Egypt. The overthrow of Morsi last year was the real revolution,” he said. He is not bothered by the students who protest just a few hundred meters away in front of the Al-Azhar Mosque week after week. El-Sissi will end those protests soon, he said.


From Mubarak to Morsi - the story so far Within two years and with the help of the army, the Egyptians have overthrown two presidents. The period has been marked by protests and disturbances. When did the first major unrest in Egypt flare up? In January 2011, Tahrir Square in Cairo became the center of massive protests against corruption - especially with regard to the regime of President Hosni Mubarak. The police responded with violence, but that did not prevent the protesters, mainly young Egyptians, from demonstrating for weeks. On February 11, it seemed as if one of their main goals had been achieved: in a statement delivered by the vice-president, Omar Suleiman, Mubarak announced his resignation after almost 30 years in office. Power was taken by the Supreme Council of the Armed Forces under Marshal Hussein Tantawi. The new government planned to draft a new constitution, hold a referendum and elect a new government within six months. What happened in the transition period between Mubarak and Morsi? The people got rid of Mubarak after 30 years, with the help of the military The period between Mubarak's fall and the election of his successor, Mohammed Morsi, was marked by continued unrest. Initially, some people welcomed the role of the army, but the Supreme Council soon found itself accused of maintaining the old power structures and of carrying out numerous human rights abuses. Already, shortly after the military took power, thousands of people were gathering on Tahrir Square again in protests to which the army responded with violence. The military took a particularly hard line just ahead of the parliamentary elections in November 2011. In the election results, the Muslim Brotherhood were the largest party with 40 percent. The ultra-conservative Salafists also made a good showing - they consider all entertainment to be sinful and reject the participation of women in public and political life. What happened once Morsi took office? Morsi could not resist the pressure of the people and the army together On June 12, 2012, Mohammed Morsi, the Muslim Brotherhood's lead candidate, won the first free presidential elections in Egypt with 52 percent of the vote. Observers say that his success was partly due to the failure of the non-Islamist parties to agree on a joint candidate. But Morsi also benefited from the reputation of the Muslim Brotherhood as a group which had suffered oppression under Mubarak and which had been banned until the 2011 revolution. From the start, Morsi's presidency was marked by a battle for power with the military. In August 2012, he suspended articles of the constitution which limited his power in favor of the military. In November 2012, he passed a decree which made his directives immune to challenge from the constitutional court. Morsi's attempts to increase his powers led to increasingly vocal protest from society and the opposition. In the course of his presidency, he found himself accused of turning Egypt into an Islamic state. What led to the latest protests and calls for his resignation? Al-Sissi and Morsi were once allies In mid-June, around the first anniversary of his coming to office, Morsi appointed seven members of the Muslim Brotherhood and a member of the former terror group Gamaa Islamiya as provincial governors. Liberal Egyptians reacted with horror, and within a few days, more and more people went out on to the streets to demonstrate against Morsi. The mass protests also marked the end of a campaign to gather signatures for a petition calling for his resignation. According to the petition's initiators in the "Tamarod" ("Rebellion") movement, they gathered 22 million signatures. Meanwhile, Islamist politicians and clerics called on Egyptians to defend the country's legitimate leadership. But powerful elements in the state had begun to support the demonstrators' demands. What role does the military play in Egypt? The Muslim Brothers have to work out how they will respond to the new situation The Egyptian army is one of the most important actors on the country's political stage. Since the end of the monarchy in 1952, all the Egyptian presidents have come from its ranks: Mohammed Nagib, Gamal Abdel Nasser, Anwar al-Sadat and Hosni Mubarak. At the same time, it was the military which was crucial in Mubarak's overthrow in that they refused to use violence to put down the demonstrations against him on Tahrir Square. The military has once more played an important role and taken the upper hand in the fall of Morsi. It was Abdul Fattah el-Sissi, army chief of staff and Morsi's defense minister, who issued the president with an ultimatum: if he didn't respond to the demands of the demonstrators, the army would step in. And it was the military which announced Morsi's arrest and appointed the president of the constitutional court, Adli Mansour, as interim president to replace him.


Mubarak walks free while Egypt's revolutionaries remain behind bars Egypt's erstwhile dictator Hosni Mubarak has been released from custody after six years, while many of the young activists who helped overthrow his regime languish in prison. Tom Stevenson reports. Mubarak was deposed in 2011 after 18 days of mass protests against his rule broke out across Egypt under the banner of "bread, freedom, and social justice." After initially serving time in Egypt's Tora prison, he was then transferred to more comfortable quarters in a military hospital in the suburb of Maadi. Now, according to his lawyers, Mubarak has returned to his villa in Cairo's wealthy Heliopolis neighborhood, the charges against him having been dropped or elapsed for time served. Has anything changed? During his incarceration, much has happened but little has changed. The country has gone through two interim heads of state and two presidents: the Muslim Brotherhood's Mohammed Morsi, and Abdel Fattah el-Sissi, the general who deposed him in a military coup in 2013 and rules to this day. But with a crippling economic crisis and a rising cost of living many are still deeply dissatisfied with the order of things and thousands of people, including many young activists who took part in the 2011 protests, are still in the country's jails - unlike 88-year-old Mubarak. The Mubarak years were seen as a time of stagnation and cronyism and the trials that followed the uprising and resulted in his detention were watched attentively by the whole country. Mubarak's release, however, was a quiet affair announced in a statement by his long-serving lawyer Farid el-Deeb. More than 800 people are believed to have been killed in the 2011 uprising, and Mubarak was previously convicted over the deaths of 239 of them before the sentence was overturned at appeal. Permalink http://p.dw.com/p/2ZtlB Justice not served Many believe Mubarak walking free displays an obvious lack of justice. "This is of course bad news for all the families of the victims who were killed during the revolution," said Abdul Rahman Gad of the Egyptian Coordination for Rights and Freedoms (ECRF), a civil and political rights organization. "It shows that the current regime doesn't know the meaning of justice, in fact it has done everything possible to eliminate the 2011 revolution, as is clear in the rulings issued by the judiciary against the supporters of the revolution and the locking up of so many of them in prison for many years," Gad told DW. Enquiries not over, but detention may be Mubarak is not yet completely in the clear: Investigations are set to reopen into whether he illegally received gifts from the state-owned Al-Ahram media organization during his reign. Charges in that case were dropped last year, but prosecutors are reopening the file and Mubarak remains subject to a travel ban. However ECRF's Gad believes that Mubarak regaining his freedom shows just how similar Egypt's new authorities under General el-Sissi (who served as head of military intelligence under Mubarak) are to the old regime, and that there's little chance he will return to detention. "This regime is the same ideologically as the previous dictatorship: It claims to be fighting terrorism, but in truth it fights spread of the demand for democracy and human rights, and that is clear in the many repressive laws passed over the past three years," he said. Mubarak supporters hold up his picture as they wait for the former president to be transferred to court in Cairo in early March Accusations of torture, repression mount Under Sissi, repression has reached levels that far surpass those of the Mubarak period. Tens of thousands have been imprisoned - often in unofficial facilities where conditions are far harsher than in official prisons - and allegations of torture by the police and army have risen markedly. In 2016 alone the Nadeem Center, a well-regarded human rights NGO, documented more than 800 reports of torture by state personnel, nearly 1,000 forced disappearances and more than 100 deaths in custody. Economic struggles pervasive Egypt faces deep structural problems in the economy that have recently led to a sharp rise in inflation and a cost of living crunch, particularly since the government adopted a new International Monetary Fund-supported austerity budget last year. Under the program the prices for two key commodities, sugar and cooking gas, were hiked just last month. Permalink http://p.dw.com/p/1Jyeu According to Nadine Sika, assistant professor of political science at the American University in Cairo, the relative lack of public outcry against Mubarak's release is evidence of how difficult the times are, and how sterile Egyptian political life has become. "The economy is a shambles and terrorism has been on the rise - people seem to be more concerned with their daily well-being than with Mubarak's release," Sika told DW. "Plus the Egyptian media has made tremendous efforts to delegitimize young activists and put responsibility for the country's instability on their shoulders." Over the past few years the political discourse in Egypt, at least among the establishment, has often denigrated the activists who mobilized for the 2011 uprisings as troublemakers or even "agents" of the West. "Even Mubarak's family is now treated positively in public life," Sika said. "Whether there will be a come back or not, we are not sure, however, public resentment against Mubarak and the former elite seems to be decreasing." 


247 articles for Egypt's future Experts are in disagreement over Egypt's new draft constitution: Is it an uneasy compromise, or a breakthrough for democracy? Possibly as soon as January, the Egyptian people will decide in a nationwide referendum. The final draft charter has 247 articles and is to be handed to interim head of state Adly Mansour on Tuesday. Mansour then has 30 days to set a date for a popular referendum on the draft. According to Amr Mussa, the head of the 50-member constitution-drafting panel, the new constitution fulfills the revolution's hopes of freedom, democracy and social justice. However, Egyptian human rights activists are of two minds about the draft charter. "Compared to the old constitution, it is definitely a step forward," Amr Abdel Rahman says. But compared with international human rights standards, the head of the civil liberties unit at the Egyptian Initiative for Personal Rights (EIPR) adds: "We still lag behind." Toned-down references to Islamic law The panel met in the upper house of parliament The new draft is not the first one since Egypt's January 2011 revolution. Almost exactly one year ago, an Islamist-dominated panel presented a constitution that was later approved by 64 percent of the population. When the military ousted President Mohamed Morsi in July 2013, however, it suspended that constitution. The current panel has just two Islamists. Article 2 defines Islam as the religion of the state and the principles of Islamic law, or sharia, as the main source of legislation, but other references to Islamic law were reduced. Al-Azhar Mosque, the country's most important religious institution, is no longer to have a say in legislation. The body to decide on matters of faith and religion is not a religious institution, it is now the constitutional court, Abdel Rahman says. "This is a plus." Representatives of conservative Islam prevailed in other areas, including women's rights, Abdel Rahman says. The new draft dismisses discrimination based on gender, ethnic affiliation or religion but the state is called upon to ensure women's liberty does not conflict with sharia demands. Other articles also show no clear departure from previous constitutions. The new draft guarantees the freedom of religion - but only for Sunni Muslims, Christians and Jews. Religious parties declared illegal Hafez Abu Saea, the director of the Egyptian Organisation for Human Rights, points out a significant improvement compared to previous constitutions: all social groups are to be represented adequately in parliament. "That forces parliament to reflect the will of the Egyptian people, regardless of their religion, age and gender." A new article declares religious parties illegal. As a result, Mohammed Morsi's Freedom and Justice Party and the Salafist ultraconservative Party of the Light might be excluded from elections. Together, the two groups had won two-thirds of the vote in the country's first free parliamentary elections two years ago. Army preserves privileges Protesters filled Tahrir Square as the panel put the finishing touches on the constitution The balance of power between parliament and the president would be adjusted under the new constitution. The army has carried its far-reaching privileges into the new era, however, and could undermine this very balance. The military budget is still not controlled by parliament. The army also reserves the right to appoint the defence minister in the next two legislative periods and to allow military courts to try civilians under certain circumstances. While Abu Saeda regards the military's special rights as a threat, he also says, there is no other choice in view of the current political situation: "We are in a very critical situation, so we have to make this compromise." The present interim government is doing its best to ensure that the new constitution receives a greater percentage of approval than the previous Islamist charter a year ago. To that end, Abdel Rahman says, it made far-reaching allowances to Egypt's most powerful institutions - including the army and the Al-Azhar Mosque. "This is the major dilemma of the Egyptian constitution: that we want a democratic constitution, but for this democratic constitution to pass, you are completely dependent on the whim and tactics of authoritarian forces," Abdel Rahman says, and adds: "This will not work."


WorldLink On this week's program, female activists in Egypt fight against sexual harassment, a band brings us the sound of the Egyptian revolution and we get to know the French community in London on this election weekend. We also look at the upcoming Rio+20 summit, meet a recycling entrepreneur in Liberia and an Ukrainian man who lives with wolves.


G8 and partners agree on financial help for Arab Spring nations Nations which signed up to the so-called Deauville Partnership in May met on the sidelines of the UN General Assembly late Tuesday to finalize plans for providing financial assistance to Arab Spring countries. The Deauville Partnership, which was created at this year's G8 summit in the French town which lends the partnership its name, was created to help countries swept up in the Arab Spring to foster democratic reforms by making aid and development assistance conditional on political and economic reforms. The five countries that will be the beneficiaries of the Deauville Partnership are Tunisia, Egypt, Morocco, Jordan and the most recent member, Libya, which was included in the discussions for the first time this week. The G8 nations - France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Britain, Canada, the United States and Russia - as well as Saudi Arabia, Qatar and Turkey and international organizations such the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank are the main contributors. France's foreign minister Alain Juppe announced late Tuesday that the G8 foreign ministers had agreed to commit $80 billion (58 billion euros) to the five countries for the next two years under the agreement of the Deauville Partnership. This figure includes the $38 billion (28 billion euros), mostly coming from the IMF and World Bank, in multilateral assistance that was committed at the partnership's last meeting. The decision came after the five Arab governments submitted their plans of action; focusing on strengthening the rule of law, supporting civil societies, developing education, speeding up economic development and enhancing the countries' regional and global integration. Their progress would be monitored on a regular basis by G8 foreign and finance ministers. Financial incentives to pursue democratic transition Juppe praised the partnership but warned of tough challenges French Foreign Minister Juppe said that the Deauville Partnership would provide the "complementary political and economic components that are keys to sustainable peace and development" and that it offered "tremendous hope for democracy, rule of law, stability, peace and a better future" for the Arab Spring nations. However, he added that it would have to be "genuine, comprehensive and immediately operational" for it to succeed. "The transition and reforms must be carried out by the countries that are in the partnership," he said. "We are talking mostly about consolidation of rule of law; we are talking about also programs to help train judges, journalists; also programs to help election processes, the partnership will develop and will pursue the dialogue that it has started with the civil society." Juppe insisted that the Deauville Partnership would not mean that the richer nations involved would exert any control over those they would be helping. "Each situation is a separate case and it's up to each of the countries to define their action plan," he said. "We are not here to impose on them." Libya talks of quick transition but warns of slower reforms Jibril said that patience would be needed with Libya Mahmoud Jibril, effectively the Libyan rebels' prime minister and head of the government of the National Transitional Council, also insisted on an equal partnership: "The future relations between these five lands and the G8 must be one on the same eye level," he said after the meeting. Unlike Egypt, Tunisia, Morocco and Jordan, Libya will not receive any financial assistance at first, instead relying on the slow thawing of former Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi's frozen assets to begin with. Despite this, Jibril promised quick progress in his country, which has already taken significant steps to lay the groundwork for a new administration. "I expect that the government will be appointed within one week or at a maximum of ten days," he said. However he urged patience over his countries implementation of reforms. "For a land that has had no democratic culture for 42 years, this slow development is only natural," he said. Speed will certainly be of the essence in the Arab Spring nations with Alain Juppe warning them that to waste time on the path to reforms and democracy would be dangerous. "Transition also harbors risks," Juppe said. "If reform is too long in coming then there is the threat of extremism." Moroccan Foreign Secretary Taieb Fassi Fihri warned that progress towards democracy was very difficult to assess with one model-for-all as many nations were at very different stages in their revolutions. He suggested that three central elements should be applied when assessing democratic transition: the efforts being made by the state, the monitoring of progress and the difference in situations between them. Easing the financial burden of revolution  Those who campaigned for change now want to see results  The Arab Spring was not, of course, only an uprising of people demanding democracy but also one which called for better living and employment conditions in countries such as Tunisia and Egypt. The toll of the uprisings which lasted many months have also affected the economic situation of the Arab Spring nations, adding to the pressure on their already fragile economies. "What is happening now in our countries is something exceptional which needs exceptional way of thinking - thinking out of the box - and exceptional measures to deal with it," said Egyptian Foreign Secretary Mohammed Kamel Amr at a press conference after the meeting. "Time is of the essence; our people have very high hopes and they need to see results on the ground." The Arab nations are acutely aware that their millions of young citizens, who in many cases were the catalyst for reforms and revolution, now demand results from their leaders. Most want to see an improvement in their job prospects and a stable economy which can help improve their living standards. Egypt's economy has certainly suffered from the upheaval with its vital tourism industry and exports suffering through the uprising that deposed former President Hosni Mubarak in February. "It is no secret that our financial position has been restricted," Amr admitted. "We need short-term financial support. We can use as much help as we can get." Juppe also made the point that it was a priority of the Partnership to help the young people of the countries affected. "School education and professional training are vital for the work of the partnership," he said, adding that the Partnership was ready to support improvements in education and the fight against illiteracy and unemployment among young people. Developments and progress in the Arab nations will be discussed at a regional summit in Kuwait on November 21-22. The next official meeting of the Deauville partners is expected to come in 2012 when the United States becomes chair of the G8. Author: Christina Bergmann, New York/Nick Amies Editor: Michael Knigge


Economic problems could decide Egypt elections The revolution in Egypt has plunged the country into an economic crisis which could worsen in the coming weeks. Still, President Mohammed Morsi remains confident. No one knows whether Egyptian President Mohammed Morsi secretly worries about the future of his country but he has enough reason to. The economy is in disrepair, tourists and foreign investors are staying away, and the Egyptian pound reached a new low in recent weeks. But the country's leader, who was a member of the Muslim Brotherhood until entering public office, doesn't appear to be worried. The upcoming elections are likely to be more important to him than the economy. In two months, Egypt will vote for a new parliament. The results could issue a warning for the ruling Muslim Brotherhood. They could show just how important the country's economic problems really are. Lack of tourists and investors Only a few tourists are visiting the pyramids Egyptian foreign exchange reserves have fallen from more than $20 billion to $15 billion (from 15 billion euros to 11.2 billion euros) since the revolution, which ended with the fall of President Hosni Mubarak in February 2011. One reason is that tourists are staying away. Although the numbers of tourists rose in the first half of 2012 after the turbulent events in 2011, demonstrations and riots in November and December ended this positive trend. "Cultural tourism especially is suffering," Torsten Schaefer from the German Travel Association (DRV) told DW. "That applies also to tourism at the pyramids or the Nile, despite there not being demonstrations there. The loss of interest from holidaymakers affects everyone who works in the tourism industry." Investors are also being cautious. The Muslim Brothers have especially lost the confidence of companies in the West and the Gulf States due to their power politics in recent months. While foreign direct investment (FDI) was just under 7 billion dollars between 2009 and 2010, it fell to 1.8 billion dollars between 2011 and 2012. As a result, the Egyptian pound has fallen significantly against the dollar in the last two years. At the beginning of 2011, the rate was 5.82 Egyptian pounds to one dollar, last week, it was 6.51 pounds. And if more Egyptians exchange their pounds for dollars, the latter's share of total cash assets in the country will rise and accelerate the decline of the local currency. Dwindling foreign reserves The Egyptian government subsidizes bread Middle and upper class Egyptians are transferring their assets to the Gulf States or moving there. This has contributed to the strong growth of the real estate market in Dubai, which had been suffering from the financial crisis, but is now being rescued by Egypt's economic problems. But the emigration of highly qualified and wealthy individuals doesn't just apply to Egypt. All the countries which were especially affected by the Arab Spring are experiencing this trend. While the Muslim Brotherhood has become more influential in recent months in Egypt, it has not managed to get the country's economic problems under control, as the Central Bank of Egypt has recognized. On December 28, the bank warned that the foreign reserves had reached "the minimum and critical limit." The Brotherhood has only managed to keep the country from going bankrupt thanks to financial aid from abroad. Qatar recently doubled its financial support to five billion dollars - and thus is made it clear that it continues to back the Islamists. Elections during an economic crisis Egyptians are concerned about the rising food prices The Egyptian government is also hoping to obtain a 4.8-billion-dollar loan from the International Monetary Fund (IMF). But it has to meet certain conditions and cancel subsidies, which account for a large part of the national budget. Currently, the government subsidizes bread and electricity, among other things. "The removal of subsidies, for example, is disproportionately likely to hit the least well-off in Egyptian society," University of Aberdeen Egypt expert Andrea Teti told DW. "This is certainly going to lead to protests from several quarters - both from the groups of people who have opposed the Islamist government thus far, as well as from those who have always provided the bedrock of its support, particularly in the provinces," he added. Pundits expect food prices to rise in the coming weeks. Wheat and sugar are imported and the falling pound would make imports more expensive. Egyptians could choose to punish the Muslim Brotherhood.


Egypt deeply divided on constitutional referendum as polls close Five weeks after the toppling of President Mubarak, Egyptians took to the polls to vote on a referendum to amend the constitution. The move has split Egypt with youth leaders of the revolution opposed to the changes. Polling stations opened in Egypt on Saturday for voters to decide on a referendum that would make changes to the country's constitution. Egyptian military leaders said they hope the vote will clear the path for elections within six months. Sharp divisions have emerged in Egypt as the country's transitional military rulers charged ahead with the referendum on changes to the constitution that would shape Egypt's political future and allow free and fair elections. Egypt's constitution was suspended by the military council that took power after mass protests forced President Hosni Mubarak from office on February 11. Voters are being asked to approve or reject nine amendments to the current constitution. Up to 45 million citizens are eligible to vote in the referendum in more than 54,000 polling stations across Egypt. The army-appointed committee supervising the referendum says the reforms are a first step towards ushering in democracy. But pro-democracy activists who spearheaded the protests that unseated President Mubarak argued that the vote is being called too early and does not go far enough in overhauling the Mubarak-era charter which they say needs to be completely rewritten. Too much too soon? It's a view echoed by Nasser Amin, head of the Arab Center for Independent Justice in Cairo. "It's not pressing at the moment for us to make nine amendments to a bad constitution," Amin told Deutsche Welle. "The situation in Egypt is now stable and allows us to work on fundamentally rebuilding the country for the next generation."  Protesters in Cairo's Tahrir Square had demanded political change One controversial point that has enraged opposition groups and the youth movement is the fact that the wide-reaching powers enjoyed by the president will remain untouched in the constitution for now. Opponents are also worried about other provisions, like those determining who can run for office. Only citizens who do not have another citizenship and are not married to a foreigner will be allowed to run for president. Many are also concerned by the pace of the measure - coming just five weeks after President Mubarak was overthrown by mass protests. "I have the impression that the methods of the past are being used again to an extent. That means: rushing through things, not allowing a general debate about the constitution, not allowing an interim constitution and insufficiently changing the old charter on certain points," Amin said. "And the use of religious groups such as the Muslim Brotherhood to push through the constitutional changes." A step toward stability? Egypt's Muslim Brotherhood, however, sees things differently and has called on people to vote "yes" in the referendum. They said the vote is the first step toward the democratization of Egypt. The referendum, they argue, would end the critical phase that Egypt is currently in and bring more stability. Henner Fürtig, director of the GIGA Institute for Middle East studies in Hamburg, agreed. "I think that if the referendum is successful, it would create different and better conditions to discuss all controversial questions," Fürtig told Deutsche Welle. "Holding on to the old constitution wouldn't do that. That's what would happen if people voted 'no' in the referendum." The expert said if voters rejected the proposed amendments, the old constitution would remain valid as the law of the land. And that would further prolong the transitional period to a democratic system. Some of the provisions called by the committee supervising the referendum include limiting future presidents to a maximum eight years in office and limiting their power to impose a state of emergency to six months before having to put it to a public vote. It's a marked change from the old charter but opposition leaders, along with a string of secular parties and young activists, have called on Egyptians to vote "no" to the amendments. Democratic debate Nobel laureate Mohamed ElBaradei, among the opponents of the amendments, was attacked by a crowd on Saturday as he tried to cast his vote, blocking him from entering a polling station in Cairo. The crowd forced him to return to his car and smashed a car window with rocks. "We don't want you, we don't want you," a crowd of youths chanted. ElBaradei is widely respected on the world stage for his work as an international diplomat, but his opponents criticize him for being out of touch with the reality of Egyptian life, because of his frequent trips abroad. Presidential candidate Amr Moussa is also opposed to the constitutional amendments and insisted that a new president must be elected before parliamentary elections.  Presidential candidate Amr Moussa opposes the proposed amendments  "With Amr Moussa, there's naturally a high degree of self-interest. Given the lack of alternative candidates, he's one of the few, publicly known people in Egypt," Fürtig said. "He enjoys respect and recognition among many for his work as secretary general of the Arab League. But he's also seen by many as a man of the old regime. "Naturally, Moussa wants to improve his chances as the presidential candidate with these tactics," the analyst added. But Moussa fears that if the referendum is approved, it would pave the way for swift parliamentary elections. That could lead to several parliamentarians from the old regime being elected to the new parliament. The controversy shows no sign of dying down. But experts see that as a positive sign, saying it shows that Egypt is debating its political future in a peaceful and democratic manner. Author: Nader Alsarras (sp) Editor: Rob Mudge


Persecuted and forgotten: Egypt's Christians Anti-Christian violence is on the rise in Egypt. Just a month ago, 45 churches and buildings were burned to the ground. But will Egyptian security forces do anything to stop it? Charred benches, notebooks covered in ash, the burned-out shell of a schoolbus. The Franciscan school in the upper Egyptian city of Beni Suef looks like the aftermath of a bomb attack. Toilets and sinks are shattered into fragments. The melted blades of fans hang from the ceiling. Bedecked in white, sister Nagaat sits beside the wreckage of an altar in a room with blackened walls. Christian services can no longer be held here. The attackers took stools, sacred images - even light switches and cables. They burned the cross on top of the building, and raised the flag of al-Qaeda in its place. "The Islamists wreaked havoc for eight hours," says Nagaat and picks up the head of a Virgin Mary statue from the floor. Increasing attacks One month after the most intense religious unrest in Egypt since the revolution of January 25, 2011, the country's Christian communities remain in shock. At least 45 churches and many other Christian facilities went up in flames on August 14. The fiercest violence raged in upper Egypt, where the number of Christians is particularly high. The attacks are thought to be retaliation for the Egyptian army's massacre of hundreds of Islamists at a Cairo protest, when the Muslim Brotherhood accused Christians of supporting the military. Memories lost: a Christian family in the town of Diabija laments the destruction of their home Egyptian Christians have seen themselves as the victims of discrimination for decades - professionally and in day-to-day life. But in the past few months, the number of violent attacks against them has risen markedly. Nagaat blames the fallen Islamist government of President Mohammed Morsi. "President Hosni Mubarak put the preachers of hate behind bars," she told DW. "Under Morsi, though, they were allowed to agitate in the mosques as much as they wanted to." Thus, she says, the imams called for the boycott of Coptic stores in Beni Suef. Police overwhelmed Security forces have arrested more than 2,000 Morsi supporters since August 14, yet the situation has improved little for Christians. In Dalga, a small city in the upper Egyptian province of El Minja, Islamists recently called for the establishment of Sharia law, and 40 Christian families fled the area after arsonists torched their homes. Meanwhile, Christians remaining in Dalga have to pay protection money to Islamists. In Beni Suef, members of the Muslim Brotherhood march nearly every evening through the city center threatening further attacks, says Amir Samy, a doctor at St Theresa hospital. Yet police have not complied with requests to place guards in front of the Christian hospital there. Samy isn't angry, though. "The police can hardly protect themselves," he told DW. On the same day the Franciscan school went up in flames, Islamists also set fire to a central police station. Samy has treated a number of policemen with bullet wounds. For one of the officers, help came too late - he was a 22-year-old Christian, and a friend of the doctor's. At his own risk, doctor Amir Samy has helped many wounded police officers at his Christian hospital Old hatreds Many Coptic Christians in Egypt place their hopes in the army, even though the military killed Christian demonstrators in Cairo little more than two years ago. Last month, Defense Minister Abdel Fattah el-Sissi promised Christians that the army would pay for the restoration of destroyed churches, but little has happened so far. "No one from the government has even seen the damage," says Sarif Nasser, a hairdresser from a small town founded by Christians just south of Beni Suef. One local church is now nothing but burned-out ruins, and the resident priest has fled. "Hatred towards Christians has been around for a long time," he told DW. "But only since Morsi have they been acting on it." Nasser was able to identify many of the attackers as members of the Muslim Brotherhood, while others, he says, were paid accomplices. The police initially arrested some of them, but they escaped the next day when a group of Islamists set the police station on fire. Faltering progress In Beni Seuf, processing the crimes is a sluggish business. The Franciscan school sent discs to authorities with photos and videos of the attacks recorded by neighbors. Dozens of plunderers can be seen in them, some laughing joyfully at the cameras. But local Christians say that few people have been arrested, despite this evidence. Nagaat is also disappointed by the lack of help from the local community. For her, that is the most difficult thing to understand, since two-thirds of her 600 students are Muslim. Some Muslims in neighboring areas have expressed regret at the fire, she says, but when it comes to rebuilding the church, no one wants to help.


In Cairo, German foreign minister offers aid and encouragement Guido Westerwelle pledged development aid and wide-ranging cooperation on a trip to Egypt. Promising a "partnership of equals," he compared the Egyptian revolution to German reunification 20 years ago. On a trip to Cairo Wednesday, German Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle offered Egypt about 30 million euros ($41 million) in aid and said he hoped that the democratic process there would help to improve Egyptians' lives. The visit came less than two weeks after chaotic protests brought down the government of authoritarian Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak. Westerwelle met with officials in Egypt's transitional government including his counterpart Abul Gheit and Defense Minister Mohammed Tantawi, who is Egypt's de facto head of state while the military runs the country. Westerwelle said he did not come to patronize Egyptians, but to offer a "partnership of equals." During a stop in Cairo's Tahrir Square, which was the center of the anti-Mubarak protests, he compared Egypt's revolution to the reunification of Germany twenty years ago. "Tahrir Square is for Egypt what the Brandenburg Gate is for us Germans," he said. "We Germans have our peaceful, liberal revolution behind us. We wish the same for Egyptians." Economic focus The German aid includes "micro loans" usually targeted to small businesses The German aid package for Egypt consists of 8 million euros ($11 million) to boost youth employment and 20 million euros ($28 million) in "micro credits." Details about the micro credits were not immediately available. Westerwelle called for European markets to be more open to Egyptian products, and said from Germany's point of view, "normal tourism is again possible." About 1.3 million Germans visited Egypt last year, but the revolution devastated the North African country's tourism industry. The German foreign minister also promised Egypt close economic and political cooperation, support in building a civil society and an independent judiciary, educational development and student exchanges. Calls for progress  Along with Egyptian officials, Westerwelle met with opposition leaders including Nobel Peace Prize winner Mohammed ElBaradei. Westerwelle was not scheduled to meet with the Muslim Brotherhood, Egypt's largest and most controversial opposition group.  International media have favored ElBaradei Westerwelle said that Egypt's transition to democracy should bring about improvements in life for all Egyptians. He said people should be able to notice freedom and democracy bringing prosperity to families and opportunities to young people. Following Mubarak's ouster, the Egyptian military dissolved the country's parliament and assumed control of the government. Egyptian Foreign Minister Abul Gheit told Westerwelle the transitional government has not yet set a date for elections, but that the military would step down within six months. Gheit added that authorities would soon release all political prisoners. Westerwelle was the fourth European political leader to visit Egypt this week. He followed British Prime Minister David Cameron, European Union foreign policy chief Catherine Ashton and Italian Foreign Minister Franco Frattini. Author: Shant Shahrigian (dpa, dapd) Editor: Michael Lawton


Protests break out in Algeria, Yemen as Egypt celebrates new dawn While Egyptians celebrate a political revolution, clashes have taken place in Algiers and Sanaa as protesters push for regime changes of their own. Police put an end to rallies in both cities. Scuffles broke out as Algerian security forces in riot gear arrested demonstrators on Saturday, with some reports that police attacked marchers with clubs. Pro-democracy protesters gathered in Algiers, attempting to stage a banned march inspired by events in Egypt, which led to the resignation of Egyptian leader Hosni Mubarak. About 30,000 security personnel were deployed, with officers surrounding protesters in a cordon to prevent the rally from taking place. Organizers said several thousand protesters had turned out. "I am sorry to say the government has deployed a huge force to prevent a peaceful march. This is not good for Algeria's image," said Mustafa Bouchachi, a leader of the League for Human Rights group, which has helped organize the march. Thousand of officers were stationed in the center of the Algerian capital, Algiers, in readiness for the protest. Protests on Saturday called for Bouteflika to leave office Some 200 people, including opposition politicians, were arrested in Algiers, according to the League for Human Rights' Khelifi Abdelmouman, who said several other protesters had been arrested in other cities. On a visit to neighboring Tunisia, German Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle said he was concerned by events in Algeria and called on authorities there to "renounce all forms of violence" against protesters. "We are betting that reason will prevail," he said from the Tunisian capital, Tunis. Mubarak's resignation on Friday had prompted spontaneous evening demonstrations by Algeria's opposition Rally for Culture and Democracy (RCD) party, which were quashed by police. A robust police presence was in place in Algiers ahead of the Saturday protest, conducted largely by middle-class men. Armored vehicles were deployed at several road junctions around the city, with the main contingent of officers based in May 1 Square, the planned starting point for the rally. "We are ready for the demonstration," Mohsen Belabes, spokesman for the RCD, said ahead of the rally. "It's going to be a great day for democracy." The party's leader, Said Sadi, told the German news agency dpa earlier this week that violence would be inevitable if people were barred from peacefully protesting. Meanwhile, Algeria's biggest opposition party, the Socialist Forces Front (FFS), chose not to participate in Saturday's demonstration. Party leader Karim Tabou told Radio France Internationale that while he supported the quest for greater freedom, the task was complex because of Algeria's history. "Algeria needs more work, more serious [efforts] than simple popular agitation," he said. Call for new freedoms, jobs A group of about 20 protesters reached the square ahead of the starting time, calling for an end to the rule of President Abdelaziz Bouteflika, who has enforced 19 years of a state of emergency in the country.  Saadi said police had ringed to city to stifle demonstrations  Demonstrators want more democratic freedom, a change of government and action to tackle unemployment. In the demonstrations on Friday, police charged on demonstrators and 10 people were arrested, according to RCD leader Saadi. He said several protesters needed medical treatment, adding that authorities had surrounded the capital to prevent people from joining the march. "Trains have been stopped and other public transport will be as well," he said. Since January, four Algerians have died of self-immolation, and at least a dozen have set themselves on fire so far this year. They are thought to have been inspired by a similar act in neighboring Tunisia, which was a catalyst for the fall of that country’s government. Wave of unrest across region Following the departure of the Egyptian president and the overthrow of Tunisian President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali last month, the Algerian regime is one of several in the Middle East and North Africa facing popular protests.  In Bahrain, money is being handed out ahead of protests  Some 300 demonstrators also took the streets of Yemen’s capital, Sanaa, on Saturday. The number of participants swelled into the thousands as they marched toward the Egyptian embassy. "The people want the fall of the government," protesters chanted. "A Yemeni revolution after the Egyptian revolution." But a group of government supporters armed with knives and sticks confronted the protesters at the central Tahrir Square, and the opposition protesters were forced to flee after scuffles broke out. Yemen's ruling party set up tents in Tahrir Square last week to occupy the space, and party officials handed out small amounts of money to reward pro-government protesters on Saturday. Yemeni officials said on Saturday they respected the Egyptian people's choice and would support them in their search for progress and development. Egyptian clean up The Egyptian military began on Saturday morning to remove barricades around Cairo's Tahrir Square, the epicenter of the revolt against Mubarak's 30-year autocratic rule. Senior military officials, to whom Mubarak handed power, said they would respect the will of the people but have yet to present solid plans for a transition. Author: Richard Connor, David Levitz (AFP, dpa, Reuters) Editor: Sean Sinico


Media muzzle: Egypt's propaganda drive When Egypt's prosecutor general last month charged 16 Egyptian and four foreign Al Jazeera journalists with broadcasting false news and colluding with a terrorist group, Rena Netjes thought she had nothing to fear. The Dutch radio and television journalist had never worked for the pan-Arab network, while her name did not match that of the journalist from the Netherlands accused in the case, Johanna Henrietta. But when officials at her embassy in Cairo found that Netjes' Dutch fiscal number used for taxes - a number also listed in her passport - matched the passport number listed by Egyptian authorities, she realized the mistake. "My baptismal name, Johanna Henrietta, is in my passport, Rena is not. I could see that they totally misspelled my name," said Netjes. When she discovered she had been swept up in the case and was now wanted by police, Netjes immediately went into hiding until she was able to flee the country a few days later. The charges against the 20 journalists are the latest in a series of moves against Al Jazeera that has spread to encompass all foreign media critical of the military-backed regime. But as international outcry has increased, critics say a propaganda campaign is being waged through domestic media that is stoking xenophobia and fueling attacks on journalists in the streets. "He was in the worst places at the worst times, the war in Iraq, the war in Lebanon, the war in Libya during the revolution," Sherif Fahmy, the brother of Mohamed Fadel Fahmy, the Cairo bureau chief of Al Jazeera English, told DW. "Never was he detained as unjustly as what is happening now." Journalists as targets Mohamed Fahmy is a recognized war reporter Fahmy, a dual Canadian-Egyptian citizen who previously worked for CNN, was arrested on December 29 at the Marriott hotel in the capital's upscale Zamalek neighborhood along with Australian correspondent Peter Greste, a former BBC journalist who won a Peabody award for his work in Somalia, and Egyptian producer Baher Mohamed. They were thrown into Cairo's Tora prison and have been held there ever since. Netjes believes she was implicated in the case because she visited Fahmy at the Marriott hotel just days before the arrests to interview him about an insurgency in Egypt's Sinai region, a topic he has extensively covered. While visiting their suite, hotel staff took down her passport information. "I never expected that would make me a member of a 'terror cell,'" she told DW from the Netherlands where she is now staying. Sherif Mansour, Middle East and North Africa Program Coordinator at the Committee to Protect Journalists, a media watchdog, said that never before had they seen an international media organization targeted in the way that Al Jazeera is being targeted in Egypt, describing it as "unprecedented." In separate cases, Al Jazeera Arabic correspondent Abdullah Elshamy and cameraman Mohammad Badr who works for Al Jazeera's Mubasher, the network's Egyptian affiliate, were arrested in July and August on charges of committing acts of violence. Badr was acquitted and released recently after being held for seven months without charge. Elshamy is still being held without charge and is currently on hunger strike in jail. "It's part of a systematic crackdown that the military-led government started once they ousted [President Mohammed] Morsi, and they aim to basically bring back Mubarak-era repression by using the legal system and also brutal force when needed," Mansour told DW. In 2013, press freedom indexes placed Egypt as the third-deadliest country for journalists, behind only Syria and Iraq. The government and its supporters have gone beyond the Al Jazeera network and accused most of Egypt's foreign media of portraying the situation inside the country in a negative light, when they say they are on a path to democracy. State and private media have towed the government's narrative and their increasingly hostile rhetoric toward foreign media has triggered concern. "Now everyday it is in the news, on all the channels that the foreign media is working for the Muslim Brotherhood, they are paid by the Muslim Brotherhood to execute their agenda," said Netjes who made news last April after she was detained in a citizens arrest and accused of espionage and "spreading European culture." Netjes was accused of "colluding with terrorists" Conspiracy theory Conspiracy theories that Western media in Egypt are supported by the Muslim Brotherhood and seeking to sow chaos in the country routinely grace the front pages of state-owned newspapers, and TV hosts have veered dangerously close to incitement. One recent front page headline in the El Wafd newspaper alleged that there was a "dubious relationship between terrorists and Western press." The article went on to claim the Muslim Brotherhood has paid $3 billion to western newspapers in a plot to defame the Egyptian revolution. Egyptian private television station Al-Tahrir recently broadcast a leaked video of the raid, arrest and interrogation of the three Al Jazeera English journalists working out of the Marriott hotel, which Egyptian media have called the "Marriott cell." The video starts with police officers entering the hotel room and the camera zooming in on Fahmy's visibly scared face. Then, the camera pans across laptops, television cameras, external hard drives, notebooks of paper, pencils, Peter Greste's business car and even the toilet, all set to the dramatic soundtrack of the Hollywood action movie "Thor: The Dark World." "It is a ridiculous video, propaganda, and everyone around the world knows this," said Sherif Fahmy. "I think they are passing a message to journalists around the world that if they are going to cover a story in Egypt, it better be favoring the political party in power now." Manipulating the media Mansour said the use of domestic media as a propaganda tool was nothing new to Egypt and that it was attacks during the rule of Morsi that made domestic media more willing to tow the military-backed government's line. The CPJ says it has documented more than 600 criminal defamation cases during Morsi's presidency against media critics on vague allegations of "spreading wrong information," "disrupting peace," "insulting the president," and "insulting religion," far outpacing the number of similar cases under former president Hosni Mubarak. But while the clampdown has had little impact on the general political class in Egypt, the deteriorating situation has triggered growing international condemnation. Saying no to the media muzzle Recently an international campaign calling for the release of journalists in Egypt was launched across the globe, and Fahmy's brother says it has been making an impact. Online supporters of the detained journalists have posted photos of themselves with tape covering their mouths and rallies have been held in Nairobi, the city Greste was based, and elsewhere across the globe. Just days after the international campaign began, Fahmy said his brother, Mohamed Baher, and Peter Greste were moved to a different prison where conditions are better. Both Fahmy and Baher Mohamed had been held in solitary confinement in the "Scorpion" section of the prison, a place reserved for the most violent of criminals. Fahmy's brother had also been denied medical treatment for a broken shoulder and instead forced to sleep on the cement floor without a blanket for over a month, according to his family. "He's very optimistic that this will all come to an end soon," said Fahmy of his brother. "I think [the authorities] are starting to realize that sooner or later they are the ones who are going to ruin Egypt's image."


Thousands gather for anti-Morsi protests in Egypt Hundreds of thousands of Egyptians have taken to the streets across the country to call for the ouster of President Mohamed Morsi. Many fear the demonstrations could turn deadly. Waving Egyptian flags as patriotic songs blasted from speakers, protesters chanted "the people want the ouster of the regime" - a catchphrase used during the 2011 revolt that toppled former dictator Hosni Mubarak and brough Morsi to power. Some protesters wore black bandanas with "Leave, Morsi" written on them, while others held up red cards. "This is the second revolution and Tahrir is the symbol of the revolution," the protester Ibrahim Hammouda said. Sunday marks the first anniversary of Morsi's presidency as Egypt's first democratically elected leader. Permalink http://p.dw.com/p/18yjL Tamarod, which means "rebellion" in Arabic, says Morsi has mismanaged the country. In a show of solidarity with the Tamarod activists, at least eight members of Egypt's upper house of parliament, the Shura Council, have resigned from their positions. "We resigned in support of 22 million Egyptians who withdrew their confidence from Morsi," Ihab al-Kharatt, an outgoing deputy, told the AFP news agency. Obama calls for calm As tensions between Morsi's opponents and supporters rose on Saturday, a day ahead of the planned protests, US President Barack Obama called on both sides to engage in dialogue rather than violence. "Every party has to denounce violence," said Obama from Pretoria, where he was meeting with South African officials and a group of youths. "We'd like to see the opposition and President Morsi engage in a more constructive conversation about how they move their country forward because nobody is benefiting from the current stalemate." Obama also expressed his concern that violent unrest in Egypt could spill over to other nations in the region. jlw/mkg (dpa, AP, Reuters, AFP)


WorldLink Join us as we mark the first anniversary of the Egyptian revolution by hearing from the people who made it happen. Also on the show: the Syrian protester whose injuries give him away and the Tunisian blogger enjoying newfound freedom on the web.


Bishop Damian: Egypt terror 'a declaration of war against Copts' More than 40 people have been killed in attacks that targeted Coptic churches in Egypt. Anba Damian, general bishop of Copts in Germany, has described a climate of terror and persecution in his homeland of Egypt. DW: Bishop Damian, in the course of two attacks on Coptic Christians in Egypt, more than 40 people were killed. Are you in contact with the communities in question, and what are they telling you? Bishop Anba Damian: We have close relations with our communities in Egypt. Some of our community members in Germany even have relatives in Egypt. We are currently in a state of shock. We have learned that, in Tanta, the explosives had been hidden inside a lectern, and how, in Alexandria, the perpetrator entered the church in which the Pope (Editor's note: Tawadros II, the head of the Coptic Church) was celebrating Palm Sunday. What are the repercussions of such attacks with respect to the coexistence between Copts and Muslims in Egypt? Prudent Muslims express compassion, dismay and sympathy. Christians have a long tradition when it comes to peaceful coexistence. We are Egyptians, we're living together in the same spot, and we try to treat one another peacefully. But what you get is a wide variety of reactions. The majority of Muslims are sympathetic and saddened. The extremists, however, rejoice when, from their point of view, the "process" (Editor's note: of killing Copts) is successful. They call out "Allahu akbar" and, speaking metaphorically, wave the flag of victory. Others, yet again, show a very faint reaction. You really get a variety of reactions. More than 40 people were killed in the Tanta and Alexandria attacks on Palm Sunday In what way has the situation for Copts in Egypt changed since the 2011 revolution? The [government of former president Mohammed Morsi] well and truly gave us the psychological terror treatment. The current [Abdel-Fattah] el-Sissi government is using a very gentle, very amiable, very smooth Middle Eastern flowery language. However, with respect to our safety and our rights, the situation hasn't really improved. We are convinced that the extremists' aggression and the intensity of their terrorism have increased in such an enormous way that it's now tantamount to a declaration of war against Copts. This war has already started in Sinai, where Copts were decapitated, torched and driven from their homes in the northern city of Al-Arish. Now they're further implementing their strategy, targeting one church after another with their aggression. Is there anything the Egyptian state can do to protect Christians? In Egypt, you get glossy, glowing statements and great promises time and again. But everything repeats itself, because no-one tackles the root of the problem. I'm deeply convinced that one has to think about behavior and ideology, and reforms to Islamic doctrine. Security measures to protect Copts must also be more genuine and vigorous. A security authority - or an expert security plan - must be established in order to prevent such insane criminal acts that claim so many lives. In your estimation, will a large number of Copts flee to Germany because of the terror threat? They couldn't do that. They don't have the means. They don't have the know-how. They don't have foreign language skills. They don't have opportunities. However, if they had those opportunities, some people would indeed prefer to leave their country. Bishop Anba Damian is the general bishop of the Coptic Orthodox Church in Germany. The interview was conducted by Christoph Ricking.


Morsi to face fourth trial for defaming Egypt's judiciary Egyptian prosecutors have referred the country’s ousted Islamist president Mohammed Morsi to trial on charges of defaming the judiciary. Morsi is already facing three separate trials on various charges. The new charges against Morsi and 24 other defendants relate to "disrespect and hatred for the courts and the judiciary," in public, on television or on social media websites over the past three years, local and state news media reported Sunday. It is the fourth case filed against Morsi since his military-backed July ouster, state news agency MENA reported. The independent newspaper Al-Shorouk reported online that the charges against Morsi were expected to stem from a speech he gave in June criticizing the outcome of trials in which alleged rioters during the 2011 revolution were cleared. The charges against other defendants, including politicians, media personalities, activists and lawyers, mostly relate to their alleged criticism of various court rulings, Al-Shorouk reported. If found guilty the accused could face up to six months in prison, a fine, or both. Morsi is already facing charges of inciting the killing of demonstrators at a protest outside the presidential palace in December 2012, conspiring with foreign groups and organizing jailbreaks. Only one case has opened and it is due to resume next month. Morsi's July ouster was met with major, prolonged public protests, which were eventually quashed by security forces. More than 1,000 people have been killed since his removal from power. Morsi narrowly won a runoff election in June 2012 but faced a difficult first year in office after the Egyptian uprising. The military opted to remove him from office after major public protests against his government, the largest of which were held in the capital, Cairo. Following a two-day referendum vote last week, officials announced on Saturday that Egypt's new constitution passed with 98.1 percent of the vote. Dissatisfaction with a proposed constitution formed and approved during Morsi's tenure was a key contributing factor in his downfall. hc/ccp (AFP, AP, dpa)


Court detains Morsi on suspicion of collaboration with Hamas as thousands protest Ousted President Mohammed Morsi has been detained by a Cairo court for suspected ties to the Palestinian militant group Hamas during Egypt's 2011 revolution. The announcement came ahead of rival mass rallies in Egypt. A Cairo judge reportedly ordered Morsi to be detained for 15 days, according to the Egyptian state news agency MENA and the online edition of al-Ahram newspaper. The judge had questioned the ousted leader before handing down the order. Permalink http://p.dw.com/p/19EtW The allegations included conspiring with the Palestinian group Hamas "to carry out anti-state acts, attacking police stations, army officers and storming prisons, setting fire to one prison and enabling inmates to flee, including himself, as well as premeditated killing of officers, soldiers, and prisoners," according to MENA. Morsi would face further interrogation under the court order as part of a larger probe by the court, to determine how dozens of Muslim Brotherhood leaders broke out of jail in January 2011. 'Return' of Mubarak regime The Muslim Brotherhood spokesperson Gehad El-Haddad called the court's conduct a signal of the return of Mubarak's regime. "The accusations read as if they're retaliation from the old regime, signaling 'We're back in full force,'" he told the news agency AFP. The court order was the first indication of Morsi's whereabouts in more than 20 days. The military has been holding Morsi, without charge, at an undisclosed location since removing him from power on July 3. Morsi's disappearance from public has contributed to heightened tensions between his opponent and supporters. Morsi's followers are demanding his reinstatement as a democratically elected official. Earlier this week, Morsi's family threatened to take international legal action against Egyptian officials for "kidnapping" their father. Rallies in Egypt Tens of thousands of anti-Morsi protesters gathered in Cairo's Tahrir Square Friday in response to army chief General Abdel-Fattah el-Sissi's call for Egyptians to show their support for the military's crackdown on "violence and terrorism." Large crowds of Morsi supporters also gathered for their own rallies as part of what the Brotherhood said would be their biggest protests yet demanding the ousted president's reinstatement. By mid afternoon clashes had broken out between rival protesters. At least two people were killed and 19 wounded in the Mediterranean city of Alexandria when the two sides threw stones and fired birdshot. Police and army forces tried to break up the fighting using tear gas. A further 10 people were wounded during clashes in Cairo. The majority of Friday's mass rallies, however, remained peaceful. Security was especially tight in Tahrir Square after el-Sissi had vowed to protect protesters. It included extra police deployments and tanks parked outside the square. kms,dr/tm (AP, AFP, Reuters, dpa)


Codetermination is not a question of education Although she recognizes the dangers inherent in an uneducated society, Egyptian Mansoura Ez-Eldin disputes the political belief that it takes a learned population to create a democracy. If post-revolution Egypt is anything to go by, the democratization process is clearly very difficult in societies with high levels of illiteracy and inadequate education. Every election from which the religious right-wing emerges victorious is decried as testimony to "a lack of awareness among the masses." While some go so far as to suggest that the "uneducated" should have their voting rights revoked, others say their ballots should only carry half as much weight as those of educated members of society. A number of politicians believe there is no hope for democracy in a state with high levels of illiteracy, and claim that while they are backed by the educated, their opponents' followers are misguided illiterates. Democracy and education are not synonymous The majority of those who hold such opinions supposedly belong to the "democratic camp," yet they see no contradiction in wanting to dictate the rules and deprive a large part of the population the right to vote. The issue of illiteracy in Egypt and its role as a hurdle to democracy divides opinion between those who blame the uneducated and impoverished for the rise of the radical right-wing, and those who scream "arrogant elitism" the moment illiteracy is suggested as a reason for slow societal development. But between these two positions is a broad spectrum of nuance. There is no doubting how hard it is to establish a democracy which upholds civil and human rights in a society where so many don't have access to a good education system. But here, there are two important things to consider. The first is self-evident: a high level of illiteracy can never justify a dictatorship on the basis that the people are "not ready" for democracy. Only too well do Egyptians remember the ease with which Hosni Mubarak and his now deceased head of intelligence, Omar Suleiman, used this line as an excuse for their own actions. Even the 'educated' lack democratic awareness The other point is that a lack of reading and writing skills are not the only problem. It is more about a fundamental lack of political education, which distorts the broader view of democracy and doesn't teach people the value of human rights and equality. If there is to be a successful transition to democracy, it is therefore important to reform the existing education system. We have to ensure that our lesson plans bear no trace of the dictatorship, religious fanaticism or propaganda at the hands of the current government. A neglected education system has much to answer for. Some Egyptian university graduates, for example believe the issues of murder, torture and human rights violations are not important when it comes to electing a president. As far as they are concerned, a democratically elected dictator is legitimized at the ballot box. It is therefore not surprising when that elected president - either out of ignorance or with manipulative intent - amalgamates his democratic election with the Islamic concept of the "vow of fidelity," which calls for absolute obedience to the leader and demonizes any revolution against him. Battle between heaven and hell After six decades under a dictator - during which time the quality of state schools and universities was in constant decline - it is hardly surprising that the term democracy is only a vague concept in the minds of the people. As such, efforts to secure democracy is up against numerous hurdles. The most dangerous is an alliance between the heirs of the military dictatorship and a budding clerical dictatorship that uses religion to its own ends. In the absence of societal resistance, such a union could lead to religious fanaticism, and by turns to members of the opposition being branded infidels and their blood being shed in the name of religion. What we therefore need is to reform confessional education, to liberate religious discourse from its defamatory and discriminatory views towards woman and those of other faiths. Some preachers and religious scholars use their standing to influence the devout by promising them a ticket to paradise if they vote for the Islamic candidate in the ballot box. Political competition thus becomes a battle between heaven and hell, in which simple people are easy prey and their interests ignored. Instinct trumps education But are the uneducated really the only ones who allow themselves to be manipulated in such ways? Although the percentage of votes for religious right-wing radicals is highest in places where there are also high levels of illiteracy, it would be wrong to use that fact as a general reproach against the uneducated. Fact is, they instinctively side with whomever they most trust to solve their problems, and vote for whoever is willing to do the legwork. That said, they are not beyond shifting allegiance once they realize they have been cheated. They don't reach decisions on an "irrational" basis, but on that of experience and past mistakes. They can react to change and are not committed to one party forever. Each voter should - regardless of educational level - have the right to act in accordance with their belief, and they should not then be accused of insufficient political awareness or an inability to differentiate. And on the other hand, status consideration has often been observed among highly educated academics - even if it is completely contrary to civil rights and freedom. Reforming the education system takes time It is unfair to criticize the uneducated every time the democratization process flounders. At the same time it would be hypocritical to deny that widespread illiteracy is a problem in desperate need of attention. Reform and development of the education system is a lengthy process that requires a fundamental desire for change. And until that is present, it is up to civil organizations, independent civil rights groups and political parties to create a political awareness, make citizens - regardless of their differences - aware of their rights and duties, and push for the overhaul of the education system In short: We have to be aware that after decades of repression, the road to a lasting liberal democracy is slow and difficult, and requires steady efforts on many fronts. It is the only way we can integrate the developments made as a result of bad education, and it will make it easier for us to find solutions that genuinely guarantee equality among all citizens - regardless of their origin or education. In 2010 the Egyptian author Mansoura Ez-Eldin was the only woman nominated for the "International Prize for Arabic Fiction". The modernization processes in daily Egyptian life play a large role in her work.


Egypt riot police storm Cairo's Tahrir Square Egyptian police have fired tear gas to disperse stone-throwing protesters gathered in Cairo's Tahrir Square. The rally was commemorating the two-year anniversary of the deaths of dozens of anti-military protesters. Several hundred riot police backed by armored vehicles stormed Tahrir Square shortly before midnight local time on Tuesday to clear a few dozen protesters throwing stones and fireworks. Police reportedly used tear gas and shots to push the protesters into nearby streets. According to news agency AFP at least one person was killed and 16 were injured in the clashes. It was not immediately clear if the deceased was taking part in the demonstration. Police reportedly intervened after protesters attempted to storm the headquarters of the Arab League, which is situated at the corner of the iconic square. The protesters were marking the anniversary of the deaths of at least 43 protesters killed during a 2011 rally against the military government that held power for 17 months between the ouster of President Hosni Mubarak and the election of his now deposed successor Mohammed Morsi in June 2012. "I am here to retaliate for my friends killed in Mohamed Mahmud," said one protester, referring to the clashes in a street off Tahrir Square. "No one has brought them their rights," added the protester, who gave his name as Mohamed. Many in the crowd used the rally to voice opposition to those they felt had "betrayed" the principles of Egypt's 2011 revolution. Chants were heard against both deposed President Morsi and the "military junta," the army-appointed interim government that replaced him in July this year. More than 1,000 people have been killed and thousands more arrested in a crackdown on Morsi supporters since his ouster. Neither Morsi's Muslim Brotherhood nor the Tamarod movement, which organized rallies calling for his ouster, called for Tuesday's demonstration. ccp/av (AFP, Reuters)


With tourists scarce, Egypt struggles to maintain heritage With a shaky economy following years of unrest and a huge drop in tourists, Egypt is struggling to preserve its fabled archaeological heritage. From Alexandria on the Mediterranean to the Great Pyramid of Giza - the last of the Seven Wonders of the World - and Aswan to the south, the North African country is home to impressive ancient monuments. For years, the sites were able to rely on a steady stream of ticket sales to finance their upkeep. But since Egypt's 2011 revolution, the number of tourists visiting the country has dwindled, leaving authorities scrambling to make up for lost revenues. "Since January 2011, our revenues have fallen sharply, which had a strong effect on the state of Egyptian monuments," Antiquities Minister Khaled el-Enany told. Sightseeing in Luxor From more than 15 million in 2010, the number of tourists visiting Egypt dropped to 6.3 million in 2015. Years of political tumult after the 2011 uprising that unseated strongman Hosni Mubarak and a jihadist insurgency following the army's 2013 overthrow of his Islamist successor Mohamed Morsi have discouraged many from visiting. Revenue from entrance tickets to historical sites dropped to about $38 million in 2015, from about $220 million in 2010. "It's catastrophic," said Fayza Haikal, an Egyptologist and professor at the American University of Cairo. Zahi Hawass, an archeologist and former antiquities minister, said the country's heritage has suffered as a result. "With the lack of funding, you cannot restore anything. Look at the Cairo museum. It's dark," he said, referring to the famed Egyptian Museum in the capital's Tahrir Square. "And you cannot ask the government to support you because the economy is not that good. And antiquities are deteriorating everywhere," he said. Ancient Egyptian wall painting Administering the country's antiquities takes about 38,000 employees, including on-site workers, technicians, Egyptologists and inspectors, the ministry says. The government has relied on foreign handouts since Morsi's overthrow, and finally decided to float the pound last year as part of an economic reform program connected to a loan from the International Monetary Fund. An important part of an economic revival would include the return of tourism, a main hard currency earner for Egypt.  Until then, Enany is trying to limit the damage. "I try to do extra activities to increase revenue," he said. For example, the Egyptian Museum, home to the golden mask of Tutankhamun and mummies of pharaohs, now stays open into the night, he said. Annual passes are also available to encourage Egyptians to visit the sites. Patrons and archaeological missions still contribute to the preservation of Egypt's ancient heritage, but the funds cannot cover everything. "Priority is given to restoration," said Haikal. "But there are excavations that have been stopped due to lack of funding." The excavations "have waited for 5,000 years and can wait," she said, but important restoration work has also been delayed. "At the very least we identify what needs restoration, and we do the minimum to keep them in a proper state." Enany is also pushing for granting public access to more sites, as was done with the recently opened tombs of Nefertari and Seti I in Luxor. The Malawi museum in the southern province of Minya has also been reopened, after a mob looted it during the bloody unrest following Morsi's overthrow. The pharaoh-faced Sphinx of Giza is one of the ancient world's iconic monuments The Grand Egyptian Museum near the Giza pyramids should also be opened, at least partially, in 2018. On some projects, the ministry can get special funds, such as for recent work done on the synagogue of Alexandria and the Abu Mena church, a UNESCO World Heritage site. Hawass, who advises Enany, says the minister needs more support and also for authorities to think beyond Egypt by undertaking exhibitions abroad. "Why leave Tutankhamun in the Cairo museum, in a dark area. No one sees it," he said. "Tutankhamun can bring money!" isi/ks (afp)


Egypt bombs targets in Sinai as border tensions escalate The Egyptian military has launched airstrikes against targets in the Sinai Peninsula near the Israeli border. The airstrikes come after fresh overnight attacks on at least one Egyptian security checkpoint. Egyptian warplanes bombed targets in the Sinai town of Sheikh Zuwaid on Wednesday, killing at least 20 suspected Islamist militants in retaliation for a series of deadly attacks on security checkpoints near the Israeli border. The state-run Al-Ahram news website reported that witnesses in the area had spotted two military jets and heard the sounds of explosions. An Egyptian army commander in Sinai confirmed to the Reuters news agency that a military offensive was under way. "We have succeeded in entering al-Toumah village, killed 20 terrorists and destroyed three armored cars belonging to terrorists. Operations are still ongoing," the commander, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, told Reuters. The airstrikes come after a fresh round of attacks on Egyptian security checkpoints near the Sinai capital of El-Arish. German news agency dpa reported that gunmen in four-wheel drive vehicles opened fire on at least three checkpoints with automatic weapons late on Tuesday, injuring one local resident. A Reuters reporter said a police officer was also wounded. "Unknown armed men opened fire on a checkpoint on the main road between El-Arish and Rafah," Egypt's state-run Middle East News Agency (MENA) said in a report also carried on Egyptian state television. Al-Ahram reported that the clashes around the security checkpoints were ongoing. According to dpa, army and police forces have entered mountainous areas south of El-Arish to hunt down suspected militants. Border tensions rising The apparent military offensive comes after the Tuesday burial of 16 Egyptian border guards who were killed in an ambush by unidentified gunmen on Sunday. During the ambush, the gunmen seized two armored vehicles and breached Israel's border, leading to an Israeli airstrike. It was the worst attack of its kind in the Sinai Peninsula in decades. The Egyptian government blamed Sunday's ambush on Palestinian Islamist militants, with President Mohammed Morsi vowing retaliation. Cairo indefinitely closed the Rafah border crossing with the Gaza Strip in response. Gaza is controlled by the Islamist group Hamas. There has been growing concern about security along the Egypt-Israeli border since the ouster of Egypt's former US-backed president Hosni Mubarak in 2011. Lawlessness has been on the rise in the Sinai Peninsula, and MENA reports that one checkpoint has been targeted 28 times since the Egyptian revolution began. President Morsi is a member of the Islamist Muslim Brotherhood, which is more supportive of the Palestinians and openly critical of Israel than the former Mubarak regime. Morsi has promised to respect all of Cairo's international agreements, which would include Egypt's historic peace treaty with the Jewish State. But other members of the Muslim Brotherhood have called the treaty into question, raising concern that one of the Middle East's anchors of stability could be weakened. slk/tj(Reuters, dpa)


Egypt's bloody past and uncertain future After military and police forces killed hundreds of people, Egyptians are left wondering - and fearing - what the future holds. DW examines recent events in the country and what could be in store for Egypt. Since being overwhelmed with euphoria after removing autocratic ruler Hosni Mubarak from power in 2011, Egypt has recently seen its first democratically elected president overthrown by the military and a crackdown on protests supporting him has left hundreds dead. Many of the demonstrators who threw out Mubarak now wonder where to put their support as the largely peaceful revolution they sparked turns into fractious fighting and the society that was united in 2011 becomes increasing politically fragmented. DW looks back at how Egyptian society was divided and what could be in store for Egyptians.


Al-Sisi squashes anti-austerity protests in Cairo, across Egypt Riot police and armored vehicles stifled planned anti-austerity protests in Cairo and around Egypt on Friday. President Abdel Fattah al-Sisi warned that the economic reforms will not be scaled back. Egyptian riot police and armored vehicles descended on Tahrir Square and elsewhere around Egypt Friday to quell any attempt at scheduled anti-austerity protests. Tahrir Square, the focus point of the Egyptian Revolution in 2011, was deserted other than the gathered security forces. A group calling itself "Movement of the Poor" called for Egyptians to protest on Friday to protest the deepening austerity measures imposed by Egyptian President al-Sisi. But major protests did not take place across the country by Friday evening. Police disrupted small gatherings, leading to minor scuffles. No injuries or deaths were reported. Armored vehicles with tear gas canister launchers and dozens of riot police were stationed in the iconic square. Authorities also shut down the Sadat metro station to prevent demonstrators from reaching the square. Due to the presence of riot police, most establishments were closed around the square Friday. A central Cairo café that stayed open Friday led to the arrest of the owner for defying Interior Ministry orders to stay closed. Police see downtown cafes as places where protestors gather. "The revolutionary bloc is reticent to protest. We now know that any street action leads to bloodshed. There is no result we can achieve with this regime," said Malek Adly, a human rights lawyer with the Egyptian Center for Economic and Social Rights. Egyptian President Al-Sisi has severely quelled dissenting protests since assuming office in 2014 Other major cities across Egypt, including Alexandria, Suez, and Minya saw heavy security. Police fired tear gas to disperse marches in Beheira, according to state-run newspaper Al-Ahram. An unnamed security official reported 25 arrests from the marches. All those detained were in the outlawed Muslim Brotherhood, which supports the Movement of the Poor. Unlicensed protests have been banned in Egypt since the military overthrew Islamist president Mohamed Morsi in 2013. Austerity hitting hard Following months of slumping imports, Egypt floated its currency, massively decreasing its value. By the end of November 3, one US dollar went from being worth approximately 8.88 Egyptian pounds to being worth 13.7 pounds, according to currency exchange website xe.com. 1 USD is currently worth more than 16.7 pounds, according to xe.com. Core inflation, over 15 percent, has reached near eight-year highs. Egypt raised electricity prices by 25 to 40 percent and included a 13 percent value-added tax in August. The Egyptian government is trying to gain support for the measures with a media campaign and wanted to expand social security schemes to prevent the poorest from feeling the effects of rising prices. The IMF will meet Friday to decide on approving a bailout program for Egypt. If approved, the initial loan tranche would be $2.75 billion (2.54 billion euros). Many Egyptians who would not qualify for the social security schemes say they can no longer afford meat, and sugar shortages are causing concerns of a threatening food crisis. Al-Sisi has stated in speeches that a collective sacrifice is necessary to prevent financial ruin, and even urged citizens to donate spare change. He said he would not soften his reforms and warned that the army could be deployed across the country within six hours should civil unrest erupt. kbd/kl (AFP, dpa, Reuters) Permalink http://p.dw.com/p/2S7YI


Egypt's women insist on their rights Egypt's women played a crucial role in the country's 'Arab Spring' revolution. But, in the post-Mubarak era, they are finding that they have to keep fighting for their rights. The largest demonstration in Egypt, in February 2011, that led to the fall of the Mubarak regime would have been unthinkable without the courageous and decisive involvement of women. Pictures went around the world of female activists, young and old, and side-by-side with male protesters, risking their lives for a better Egypt. Women were crucial in preparing the revolution - among them, Israa Abdel Fattah, the now world famous Internet activist and founder of the "April 6 Youth Movement." The "April 6 Youth Movement" is considered the driving force behind the Egyptian uprising. The movement grew out of the workers' rights struggle in Mahala in the Nile delta in April 2008 and issued the first calls for protests - long before the iconic demonstrations on Tahrir square in Cairo. Women were side-by-side with men during the anti-Mubarak uprising, noted Abdel Fattah Israa Abdel Fattah who, together with blogger Asmaa Mahfouz, had been nominated for the Nobel Peace Prize for their roles in the revolution in Egypt, recall the beginning of the uprising. "We turned this little private strike into a country-wide protest. It is important to know that the April 6 Youth Movement was founded as a grass roots movement and only later did other movements join - like Mohamed ElBaradei, or "We all are Khaled Said" movements, she told Deutsche Welle. A break with traditional roles Abdel Fattah also remembers the "Egyptian utopia" - those 18 days of revolution when the differences between men and women, between Christians and Muslims and Islamists and liberals became invisible. "We used to all think: Egyptians are uncivilized, all the time they harass women. But after the revolution we realized that all this bad behavior had gone away, as soon as the Mubarak regime was gone. His corrupt regime had turned people bad and made them corrupt. No women got harassed anymore." No doubt: The dynamics of the youth uprising in 2011 has meant an unparalleled break with the previous authorities of Egyptian society in the past. "The revolution has changed many things. Before the revolution it was uncommon that women would participate in the first row - sleep in tents on Tahrir square, far away from their families. Our presence has transformed a lot," Abdel Fattah said. Massive pressure Since the uprising, women have become targets of conservatives and the military, said Ez-Eldin In post-revolutionary Egypt, women were quickly exposed to pressure from several different sides. The military, which ruled until July 2012, initially and intentionally ignored them, while radical Salafists have massively attacked their activities. Later, they became the target of brutal attacks by the military: "Women were in the first row on Tahrir square, but with the surge of the Salafists all of a sudden we were being told to go home." This position existed with the Islamists, the Salafists and the conservative military council. In December 2011, the women who were demonstrating were massively pressured, harassed and threatened with violence: Pictures of undressed women on Mohammad-Mahmoud street went around the world. Sexual harassment also was on the rise, but this time organized by the military council, explained author and women's rights activist Mansoura Ez-Eldin. Women: the losers of the revolution? Because of this situation and the setbacks which increasingly are pushing Egyptian women to the political fringes and taking away their fundamental rights, they often are described as the "losers of the revolution" - but this is too quick a conclusion. We have taught society to respect us, said Dalia Ziada According to Dalia Ziada, executive director of the Ibn Khaldun Center for Development Studies in Cairo and co-founder of the new Justic Party, Egypt's women have decided to fight for their freedom and equality in society. "We have taught this society to respect us. We see that people across the country have a strong will to implement changes and that we have overcome our fear. The limitations through fear - of the regime, of the police - are gone." Ziada believes that the heart of the problem is that Egypt has no constitution that would ensure fundamental rights, like equality for all citizens. That's why "the fight for basic rights will continue. It will take time and I really hope there won't be any more violence. The constitution is a critical issue and we have to ensure that it will be written reasonably." There is a simple message for the new political elite around President Morsi: "Democracy or leave!"


'Tahrir Lounge' pushes grassroots democracy In a project funded by Germany, a team of young Egyptians in Cairo is trying to boost civil participation and create political awareness without subscribing to any particular ideology. At a recent evening in Cairo, a group of about 40 young Egyptians took part in a lively discussion about corruption and nepotism, hot-button issues in their still politically turbulent country. The event was held at the Goethe Institut, a German government-funded organization promoting German language and culture. The debate followed the screening of a film about how the Egyptian revolution was perceived by the residents of a village in the Nile Delta in 2011. The director spoke about a primary school teacher who was suddenly appointed the head of an entire administrative district allegedly because he was a relative of the local governor. The project is a part of Germany's Goethe Institute in Cairo That prompted a journalist on the podium to turn to a government official invited to take part in the debate and ask: "How can it be that this primary school teacher who has never done anything in his life besides teaching at this school suddenly heads an administrative district that's also relatively large? How can that be? Just because he's a cousin of the governor?" The animated debate was part of an event organized by the "Tahrir Lounge," an initiative founded by Mona Shahien, a 27-year-old Egyptian political activist. It's funded and promoted by the Goethe Institut, the German embassy and the German foreign ministry. But the organizers are all Egyptians. "Tahrir," which means "liberation" in Arabic, is the name of the central square in Cairo which became a rallying point for protests that toppled the government of President Hosni Mubarak more than two years ago. "The Tahrir Lounge is a space for everyone. Our main goal is civil participation and politically mature citizens," Shahien said. "You can't achieve democracy without involving people and without them knowing their rights. You can only have democracy when the voters are conscious of their choice," she said. Respect for all To meet those goals, the Tahrir Lounge organizes events on a near-daily basis that are open to all. There are workshops on human rights, discrimination against women as well as on how to lead negotiations and discussions or on conflict resolution. Over 50 parties and groups of all political stripes have participated in seminars so far and presented themselves to largely young audiences. For Mona Shahien, it's an important development because she believes that though a lot of young Egyptians are interested in politics, they often don't get a chance to get actively involved in the existing political spectrum. That's why the Tahrir Lounge reaches out to young members of political outfits and offers free workshops. Mona Shahien says the project is hugely important for young politically interested Egyptians "We ask them to nominate two or three of their people who then take part in a training seminar," Mona Shahien said. "After that, they can communicate their concerns and issues to their respective parties. We only offer them a framework on how to do that." The seminars help the representatives of the invited parties to get to know each other and they often keep in touch long after the training sessions. That helps create new channels of communication. And that in turn leads to people who often hold completely different political points of view and ideological positions to exchange ideas and learn to respect each other despite their political differences. That's linked to a fundamental principle of the Tahrir Lounge, Mona Shahien said, which is that the project should not cater to any particular political ideology. "We have now built a really good reputation because we're one of the places in Egypt that isn't linked to a certain political direction," she said. "You can't say we're liberals or Islamists or secularists. We're a space where all these strands are represented." An uphill battle Despite the obvious demand for democracy-strengthening initiatives in post-revolution Egypt and financial help from Germany, the Tahrir Lounge still faces a host of challenges. The Egyptian administration remains wary of foreign powers, especially when they are seen to be trying to wield political influence in the country. That's why it remains very important for the project to remain independent in framing its own program, Mona Shahien said. The Tahrir Lounge organizes workshops on a near-daily basis "Right from the beginning, we said yes we are financed by the German government, yes we do belong to the Goethe Institut," she said. "But when it comes to content, we are completely independent." Back at the event at the Goethe Institut, the situation turns increasingly awkward for the government official who's being grilled about nepotism in politics. He tries to defend his ministry and argues there are now mechanisms in place to curb nepotism. Basically, we are on the right path, he says, adding that these things take time. Even God needed six days to create the world, he argues. That elicits a lot of head shaking and frowns in the audience. A few laugh at his argument. Mohamed, 24, says the discussion was a partial success. "The problem does remain. But at least many have realized that the government hasn't recognized the seriousness of the situation," he says. "A year ago, I would have accepted the official's reaction. But now I see that the government is incompetent and fails to take action." Mohamed is a frequent participant in Tahrir Lounge workshops. In the past few months, he says, he's realized that politics is often a dirty business. But it's important to understand how it works, he adds, otherwise you can't change anything.


Iran leader Ahmadinejad arrives in Egypt for historic visit Mahmoud Ahmadinejad has arrived in Egypt, marking the first visit by an Iranian leader to the country since Iran's 1979 revolution. Iran's president has said he is hoping to improve relations between Tehran and Cairo. Egyptian television footage showed Egypt's President Mohammed Morsi welcoming Iran's Ahmadinejad at Cairo airport on Tuesday, beginning his three-day visit to the country. The two leaders held discussions on regional developments and on "how to end the bloodshed in Syria... without military intervention," Egyptian state news agency MENA news said. Iran is a close ally of the Syrian government, while Egypt has called on President Bashar Assad to step down. During his stay, the Iranian leader will attend an Organization of Islamic Cooperation conference in Cairo, and hold talks with Egyptian officials. Ahmadinejad is also scheduled to meet with the head of Al-Azhar, the over 1,000-year-old university that is Sunni Islam's highest institution of learning. Prior to leaving his country, Ahmadinejad told reporters he was making the trip to improve Iranian-Egyptian relations. "I will try to pave the ground for developing cooperation between Iran and Egypt," he told told Iran's official IRNA news agency, adding the visit would "definitely influence the bilateral ties" between the two countries. The Iranian president has also said he wanted to visit the Gaza Strip, the Palestinian territory which neighbors Egypt to the east and is run by Hamas. "If they allow it, I would go to Gaza and visit the people," Ahmadinejad told Beirut-based TV station Al Mayadeen Tuesday. "The political geography of the region will change if Iran and Egypt take a unified position on the Palestinian question." Severed diplomatic ties Tehran severed ties with Cairo following the 1979 Islamic revolution and a 1980 peace agreement between Egypt and Israel by then-president of Egypt Anwar Sadat. Since the 2011 Egyptian revolution to oust longtime strongman Hosni Mubarak, Iran has actively sought to improve relations. Morsi visited Tehran in August to attend a conference of the Non-Aligned Movement. But Egypt has generally been cautious about re-establishing full diplomatic ties with the Iran, apparently wary of straining relations with Gulf countries like Saudi Arabia and Qatar. Iran has been supportive of Assad's government during the country's ongoing civil war, while Egypt and the oil-rich Gulf states have come down on the side of the opposition. "If Tehran and Cairo see more eye to eye on regional and international issues, many [issues] will change," Ahmadinejad said. dr/hc (AFP, dpa, AP, Reuters)


Egypt orders shutdown of torture rehabilitation clinic Egypt has ordered to freeze the bank account of the El-Nadeem Rehabilitation Center in Cairo, a clinic that provides legal assistance to torture victims. What are the consequences for human rights in the country? The El-Nadeem Center for Rehabilitation of Victims of Violence received a letter from Egypt's Central Bank on Thursday, announcing the freezing of its account in accordance with a law passed under former Egyptian dictator Hosni Mubarak. The current president, Abdel Fattah el-Sissi, has allegedly used torture to squash dissent in the country. The shutting of the clinic, according to human rights groups, is an attempt to cover up the abuse. The logo of the El-Nadeem Center "This is yet more evidence of the Egyptian authorities' chilling contempt of perceived critics. By freezing El-Nadeem's financial assets the authorities are preventing the center from carrying out their crucial work to provide care to survivors of horrific violence and violating victims' right to health and to reparation," said Phillip Luther, Research and Advocacy Director for the Middle East and North Africa at Amnesty International. The organization announced the freeze on Twitter. "Friends, we have received a decision from the Central Bank of Egypt today that our bank account will be frozen in accordance with law number 84 from 1992," it wrote. The organization claims that the Mubarak-era law shutting down the center is not applicable, as it is registered as a public clinic by the Egyptian Ministry of Health and not a private association. Although the main accusation is that the center is being closed for political reasons due to its counseling of torture victims, the center also helps those who are suffering from domestic violence.  "They've frozen the bank account of the El-Nadeem Center. Many women have sought refuge there due to being exposed to domestic violence. Where will they go now?" tweeted Sondos Shabayek. The organization, which was founded in 1993, archives cases of violence and kidnapping on its social media accounts. "Two cases of murder, five cases of death in places of detention and 52 cases of torture and mistreatment. This is the torture archive in the media from September 2016," it tweeted. The closure of the clinic is one of the many recent developments concerning to human rights observers in regards to the Egyptian military, which backs the current president, el-Sissi. Murder of Giulio Regeni Giulio Regeni was found murdered in February In addition to cases of abuse among Egyptian citizens, the tortured body of Italian Cambridge University student Giulio Regeni was found alongside a highway running between Cairo and Alexandria earlier this year. He was in Egypt researching trade unions. Controversy surrounded his death, as many believe that his left-wing political research made him a target for the el-Sissi government. Italian media and diplomats have accused Egyptian security services of being behind his death, but Cairo has denied the allegations. Regeni's murder incited outrage in the global community. In April 2016, the Italian officials recalled their ambassador to Cairo, due to a lack of cooperation in the murder investigation. Crackdown on NGOs The closure of the El-Nadeem Center is one of the many NGOs that have been shut down in recent years by the el-Sissi government. The crackdown on civil society began shortly after the ouster of Mubarak in the country's 2011 revolution. The Egyptian military and security forces are the country's most dominant political players The Egyptian government maintains the power to shut down NGOs that don't have official registration or for accepting unauthorized foreign funding. In 2014, the new president El-Sissi even passed an amendment that could allow for life-imprisonment for human rights activists. In another Amnesty report from earlier this year titled "Egypt's crackdown on NGOs," the deputy director of the organization's Middle East and Africa program, Said Boumedouha, said, "Egypt's civil society is being treated like an enemy of the state, rather than a partner for reform and progress." Reform in Egypt in regards to NGOs has proven difficult due to the country's military, which maintains considerable influence on public institutions.


World in Progress In this program: Where has the recent revolution left Egyptian women? - 50 years after the Civil rights movement in the USA, new inequalities need to be adressed - Online Site strives to make the world a better place - Childcare centers helping kids of longterm prisoners in Nepal


Mubarak taken to Cairo military hospital after leaving prison Former Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak has left jail and gone to a military hospital after a court ordered him freed pending trial. However, he is being held under house arrest on the orders of the prime minister. Mubarak was released from jail Thursday and taken to a military hospital in southern Cairo, officials said. The prime minister's office had earlier announced it would place the 85-year-old Mubarak under house arrest on the basis of Egypt's current state of emergency. The April 6 protest movement, which in part led the uprising that caused Mubarak to step down in early 2011, condemned the court order as a "deviation from the course of the revolution." Mubarak faces prosecution for corruption and for complicity in the deaths of hundreds of people killed during the uprising against him. Last year, a court sentenced him to life in prison for complicity, but he went on to win an appeal. The former president may appear at his next scheduled hearing, on Sunday, although he has not always attended court sessions in the cases against him. The court ordered Mubarak's release after a hearing on charges that he accepted gifts from a state-owned newspaper, the last case keeping him in detention, where he has spent over two years. In the past when courts have approved Mubarak's release, prosecutors have leveled new charges to keep him in detention. The state news agency MENA reported, however, that Wednesday's decision could not be contested because it was issued by an appeals court. Difficult timing Mubarak's release adds a new element to Egypt's turmoil. Nearly 1,000 people have died since the August 14 dispersal of protests supporting ousted President Mohammed Morsi. Egypt's interim government arrested several senior members of the Muslim Brotherhood, the Islamist group that helped bring to Morsi to power; he himself has been in detention since his July 3 ouster. The Tamarod youth movement has blamed Morsi's government for Mubarak's release, accusing the president's short-lived state of failing to admit new evidence in the case against the autocrat. In a statement, Tamarod warned against releasing Mubarak, saying it would be a threat to national security. "If it is acquittal for Mubarak today, it will be acquittal for Morsi tomorrow," the group alleged. "We will not remain silent about freedom for any killer of the Egyptian people." 'Interference' Meeting on Egypt's recent strife, European Union foreign ministers agreed to suspend export licenses for weapons or goods that could be used for internal repression, according to Catherine Ashton. The bloc's foreign policy coordinator added that member states would review aid to Egypt. Germany, Italy, the Netherlands and others had already suspended arms exports to Egypt. "Egypt can never accept an interference in its sovereignty or the independence of its decisions or an interference in its internal affairs," interim Foreign Minister Nabil Fahmy said in a statement after the EU talks. "The only standard that rules Egypt's decisions is the supreme interest of the country and its national security." The US also announced that it would also review aid in light of the bloodshed. Saudi Arabia, which opposes the Muslim Brotherhood, promised to make up any shortfall. mkg/pfd (Reuters, AFP, dpa, AP)


Mubarak taken to Cairo military hospital after leaving prison Former Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak has left jail and gone to a military hospital after a court ordered him freed pending trial. However, he is being held under house arrest on the orders of the prime minister. Mubarak was released from jail Thursday and taken to a military hospital in southern Cairo, officials said. The prime minister's office had earlier announced it would place the 85-year-old Mubarak under house arrest on the basis of Egypt's current state of emergency. The April 6 protest movement, which in part led the uprising that caused Mubarak to step down in early 2011, condemned the court order as a "deviation from the course of the revolution." Mubarak faces prosecution for corruption and for complicity in the deaths of hundreds of people killed during the uprising against him. Last year, a court sentenced him to life in prison for complicity, but he went on to win an appeal. The former president may appear at his next scheduled hearing, on Sunday, although he has not always attended court sessions in the cases against him. The court ordered Mubarak's release after a hearing on charges that he accepted gifts from a state-owned newspaper, the last case keeping him in detention, where he has spent over two years. In the past when courts have approved Mubarak's release, prosecutors have leveled new charges to keep him in detention. The state news agency MENA reported, however, that Wednesday's decision could not be contested because it was issued by an appeals court. Difficult timing The Tamarod youth movement has blamed Morsi's government for Mubarak's release, accusing the president's short-lived state of failing to admit new evidence in the case against the autocrat. In a statement, Tamarod warned against releasing Mubarak, saying it would be a threat to national security. "If it is acquittal for Mubarak today, it will be acquittal for Morsi tomorrow," the group alleged. "We will not remain silent about freedom for any killer of the Egyptian people." 'Interference' Meeting on Egypt's recent strife, European Union foreign ministers agreed to suspend export licenses for weapons or goods that could be used for internal repression, according to Catherine Ashton. The bloc's foreign policy coordinator added that member states would review aid to Egypt. Germany, Italy, the Netherlands and others had already suspended arms exports to Egypt. "Egypt can never accept an interference in its sovereignty or the independence of its decisions or an interference in its internal affairs," interim Foreign Minister Nabil Fahmy said in a statement after the EU talks. "The only standard that rules Egypt's decisions is the supreme interest of the country and its national security." The US also announced that it would also review aid in light of the bloodshed. Saudi Arabia, which opposes the Muslim Brotherhood, promised to make up any shortfall. mkg/pfd (Reuters, AFP, dpa, AP)


'The EU was too squeamish about Egypt' European foreign ministers will debate this week whether to freeze financial aid to Egypt. But trust in the European Union has already eroded among all Egyptian players, says political scientist Josef Janning. Deutsche Welle: The EU wants to increase economic pressure on Egypt. Given the country´s economic weakness, is this the right instrument? After all, Egypt is a strategically important country in the region. Josef Janning: An economic downturn is already taking place because with the current violence, there is no climate for investment and economic cooperation. It is problematic for Egypt, and not easy for the EU to make such a decision. For one thing, it weakens the already weak civil society structures. On the other hand, Europe cannot carry on as if nothing has happened. In Syria, the EU failed to find common ground on arming the rebels. Has the EU found one voice on Egypt? Probably the differences are less pronounced than in the case of Syria. At the EU meeting on this week (21.08.2013), the foreign ministers are likely to agree to condemn the fact that the path of dialogue, which the military had put on the table at the start, has been abandoned. The EU will also make it clear that it is not prepared to continue to help without further conditions. But they will probably renew the offer to send representatives to support the process, once there are signals that all sides are willing to talk. Who would the EU even talk to at this point? Foreign Minister Nabil Fahmi would make a good dialogue partner for the EU, says Janning The dialogue partner would be the interim government. In Foreign Minister Nabil Fahmi, they have a diplomat experienced in international and western circles. If the interim government wants to, it can bring dialogue partners who are well-known in Europe and the West and certainly enjoy respect. But at the moment there is too little confidence in the interim government, hence European reluctance. Does Egypt still trust the European Union? That depends on who you ask. The Muslim Brotherhood is disappointed because the Europeans have, in their view, failed to denounce strongly enough the fact that the military conducted a coup. The interim government, on the other hand, is disappointed because the Europeans are now criticizing them - when it sees itself in a fight against terrorism and violence. The young protesters in Cairo are also disappointed because they see Europe as turning away as soon as things become difficult. If Europe is perceived in all these different ways - maybe the EU doesn't really know how to deal with Egypt and the region? Yes, there is something to that. But then you always see better with hindsight. It is now clear that in the early phase of the revolution, a significantly greater commitment from the Europeans could have had more effect. Also a more intense engagement with the Muslim Brotherhood would have been important, because there were and are moderate forces within their ranks, who, though they have a different idea of ​​reforms, would have been willing to talk. The Europeans' reservations were too great. They should have worked more intensively with these parties. Exactly how should the EU have responded in the early stages? The Europeans were quick to declare that they wanted to support the transition process in Egypt. But then they made hard work of implementing it. The EU's support apparatus is very slow. Help should be available more quickly to support civil society players. And of course at the political level there needs to be the will to have a dialogue with those political forces which, though they may not sharing their own ideas - such as the Muslim Brotherhood - represent a broad swathe of society. Josef Janning studied political science, international relations, and history at the Universities of Bonn and Cologne. He works at the German Council on Foreign Relations (DGAP), and has been the Mercator Fellow of the Alfred von Oppenheim Center for European Policy Studies since 2013.


Life under martial law in Egypt A curfew in many Egyptian cities, put in place for safety reasons, has left many feeling locked up. Daily life is far from normal, but it has to go on. Here's how some people are trying to cope. Egypt is under martial law. A curfew from 9 p.m. to 6 a.m. is supposed to help the army bring the country's tense situation under control. Until this past Saturday (24.08.2013), the lockdown started every night at 7 p.m. This now only applies on Fridays, when most protests take place. Commander-in-Chief Abdel Fattah el-Sisi put the curfew in place after clearing the Muslim Brotherhood protest camps at Nahda Square and Rabaa al-Adawiya mosque on August 14, when a fierce gun battle took place between the army and Muslim Brothers. Egypt's typically lively streets are unusually quiet In almost all of Egypt's cities, people are allowed onto the streets only in the daytime. But the curfew, intended to calm the political situation, is having other effects on the lives of typically sociable Egyptians. For example, people have to struggle through dense traffic in order to be home before the curfew hour. While some try to take advantage of the lockdown time, others are suffering, and hoping that the state of emergency will soon be lifted. Social life is affected "Nothing stands in the way of beauty," says Hanan Moselhy. "No revolution, no Muslim Brothers - and also no protest marches," adds the 36-year-old, who works as a personnel manager at a leading regional retail firm. She has to present a well-groomed image, so she still goes to her weekly manicure and pedicure sessions. Moselhy also continues to meet with friends and colleagues, despite the current political circumstances in Egypt. She also does some telecommuting, with emails and conference calls from home. She wants to keep busy, and for her life to be as normal as possible. Mahmoud Gomaa: Spanish instead of sports But the curfew does occasionally thwart her plans. "My social life is really suffering at the moment," says Moselhy, who lives with her parents in the posh Tagamo district on the outskirts of Cairo. "On weekends I can only meet with my friends during the daytime. Staying at home every night is boring. So I go to sleep early." Mahmoud Gomaa is trying to be productive during the enforced time out. "I've started learning Spanish," he says. He likes to stay busy, and is normally out and about from early morning until after midnight. Throughout the political upheaval, the 30-year-old has continued to work full-time in his job as a specialist for an information technology company. He liked to balance out his stressful job by playing a lot of sports after work, but that's become impossible. Gomaa is trying to think of other ways of releasing his pent-up energy, like traveling somewhere in Egypt where there is no curfew - such as the Red Sea. 'Trouble and distress' Abir Hassan lives together with her husband and three children in a small side street not far from Tahrir Square. The 38-year-old and her husband run a small auto shop, which they've had to temporarily close. "We're really suffering in this situation," says Hassan, who is veiled from head to toe. "We're surviving the days with trouble and distress. But, God willing, it will get better soon," she adds. She's been working providing domestic help to wealthier families, to at least earn a bit of money in the meantime. Taxi driver Ali Hussein has been earning less because of the curfew But Hassan's greatest worry is something else altogether. "I'm afraid for my children and my husband," she said. "I immediately go into a panic if my husband is late coming home." When that happens, she heads out looking for him - curfew or no curfew. At the beginning of September, school starts again - and like many mothers, Hassan is unsure how to proceed. "I don't know if I can send my children to school. I'm afraid of attacks that could happen any time," she says. Hassan blames the Muslim Brotherhood for the country's difficulties. And regardless of the losses she and her family have suffered, she believes the army's curfew is the right move to bring back law and order. Uncertain times Taxi driver Hussein Ali Hussein trusts el-Sisi as a ruler. "I think that el-Sisi should become president," he says. Due to the political situation and the curfew, he's only been earning about a quarter of what he typically would. "I barely make enough to support our household, and don't know anymore what I can do," says the 43-year-old, who lives with his wife and son in Abedeen, a neighborhood in the heart of Cairo. They can't afford to do any activities, and spend their evenings mostly watching television. "The future is so uncertain," says Hussein, gazing sadly out of the window of his taxi.


Meinardus: 'Dramatic escalation in Egypt' Egyptian police have cleared the Muslim Brotherhood's protest camps; Vice President ElBaradei has resigned as a result. Violence is no solution, says Ronald Meinardus, head of the Friedrich Naumann Stiftung in Cairo. DW: Mr. Meinardus, what do you think about the most recent developments in Egypt? Ronald Meinardus: The situation has escalated dramatically. In the last few days and weeks, there has been kind of a ceasefire. This ceasefire has now been broken. The protest camps were cleared in a fashion that can best be described as excessive. The Muslim Brotherhood calls it a massacre and has announced retaliation. What we see right now is an expansion and decentralization of the protest. The people who were kicked out of the protest camps don't go home - they gather, and some of them roam the streets, marauding. Then, violent clashes with the Brotherhood's opponents occur. So it doesn't look like the military interim government and the Muslim Brotherhood are approaching each other? Meinardus: there's no basis for political talks in Egypt right now The precondition for a peaceful agreement are political talks. But they require a willingness on both sides and a certain climate of trust. These things do not exist right now. The country was deeply divided even before this most recent escalation, and the polarization has even worsened after today's events. There are - and that is part of the Egyptian tragedy - no significant forces of moderation. You're either on one side or on the other. The country is missing a connective entity. Last week, politicians from abroad tried to mediate. One of them was Germany's Foreign Minister, Guido Westerwelle. But their efforts didn't go anywhere, because the Egyptian government said 'We will solve these problems in our own fashion.' At the moment, it doesn't look like a political process can start any time soon. Even Egypt's most important western ally, the US, demanded that the protests be allowed and that Mursi be released - so far without success. How much influence does the West still have on the Egyptian leadership? Opportunities to appeal are rare. The men in power are western-minded and secular. The head of the military, Abdel Fattah al-Sisi, attended a military academy in the US. But it's obvious that they don't really care about any advice from the west. Egyptian media run an almost xenophobic campaign. They say that the issues are internal Egyptian ones and that the West shouldn't intervene. Some observers talk about a nationalist revolution. Egyptian security forces detain demonstrators at one of the pro-Mursi protest camps in Cairo What could be done to include the Muslim Brotherhood after all? The Muslim Brothers have suffered many losses. They now see themselves in the role of martyrs. It will take a very long time for this pain to subside. The blood on the streets of Cairo and other cities can be washed away. But the psychological trenches will be very hard to bridge. The Brotherhood has said before that the least they demand is for their leaders to be released. Of course they want the disempowered president Mohammed Mursi to return to office. The interim government says this is a no-go. How strong is the Muslim Brotherhood and how much support does it have among the people? We can compare the Muslim Brotherhood to a Leninist party. It grew in the underground and was persecuted and criminalized for decades. There is a tight network of cadres. The Brotherhood is well organized and structured and apparently very well financed, too. The Brothers are one of the big political powers in Egypt. There are estimates that they would get around 20 percent in a political election. The large majority of Egyptians, though, is sick of the Muslim Brotherhood's rule. That's why there were huge anti-Mursi protests that finally led to the military intervention. We are in a very explosive situation right now. All I can say is, you're not doing yourself any favors if you're trying to eliminate the Muslim Brotherhood by military means. That is not an option. It won't be successful. Ronald Meinardus is head of the Cairo office of the Friedrich Naumann Stiftung, which has close ties to Germany's liberal party (FDP).


Morsi supporters continue protests despite looming crackdown Supporters of ousted Egyptian President Mohammed Morsi have continued to stage sit-ins in Cairo after police said they would clear out protest camps. Meanwhile the judiciary has extended Morsi's detention by 15 days. Protesters vowed to remain at the camps on Monday, saying their sit-ins in the northeast and south of the Egyptian capital would remain until Morsi was reinstated. Security officials had said the day before that police would start to move into the camps as early as Monday morning, but they have so far held off. Police were expected to blockade the sit-ins and use water cannon to break up the camps. Threats of a face-off have heightened tensions between Egypt's ruling security apparatus and the Muslim Brotherhood party, which has organized continual demonstrations since Morsi was removed from power by the military on July 3. Morsi has been held in an undisclosed location since July 26. On Monday a judicial official said the judiciary was extending his detention period for a further 15 days as investigations continue. Morsi, Egypt's first democratically elected president, is accused of conspiring with Palestinian militants during the country's 2011 uprising. Judge Hassan Samir chose to extend Morsi's decision while looking into allegations that he colluded with Islamist group Hamas to break out of prison alongside 33 other Muslim Brotherhood members in 2011, the official said. He was speaking on condition of anonymity because he was not authorized to talk the media. Protesters decry government crackdown Western and Arab envoys have pressured the military-appointed government to avoid using force to clamp down on protests. Weeks of international mediation efforts to diffuse the political crisis in Egypt have, however, proven fruitless. More than 250 people have been killed in nearly six weeks of clashes between security forces and Morsi supporters. Protest leaders say the government is using excessive force, blaming security forces and "thugs" for the bloodshed, which includes two separate instances where dozens of Morsi supporters were shot dead. Government officials have repeatedly called for the protests to end their sit-ins and have promised the Brotherhood a role in the country's new government. But the Brotherhood sees it differently, saying that the group has been the target of an unfair crackdown. A number of senior Brotherhood leaders have been sentenced to jail on charges of inciting violence and TV channels seen as sympathetic to the Morsi have been shut down. "We want to send a message to the coup leaders: the Egyptian people insist on continuing its revolution … And the people will insist on turning out in all squares," senior Brotherhood official Farid Ismail told a news conference. Morsi came to power in June 2012, but concern he was consolidating power and cracking down on dissent prompted mass rallies calling on him to leave. Large turnout at protests called for two weeks ago by the head of the military, Gen. Abdel-Fattah el-Sissi, indicated that there is still large support in Egypt for the coup that removed Morsi from office. dr, ccp/hc (AP, Reuters, AFP, dpa)


Tension in Egypt follows delayed election results It’s still not clear who will be Egypt’s new president, but the Muslim Brotherhood has announced a second revolution if their man doesn't win. And the military is on heightened alert. In a little back room in a Cairo apartment building, Badr Mohammed Said has set up his small TV set. He is a bawab by trade, a security man and handyman who helps around in the house. He knows everybody in the building: he helps carry shopping bags, does little repair jobs and the maintenance for the air conditioning. On his small TV, he watches the EURO 2012. He is an avid supporter of the German team in the soccer championships. But he's even more interested in the new Egyptian president and will switch channels as soon as there are new developments. "I'm concerned that the results haven't been announced yet", says Said. "That only increases tension." Dead Egyptians and soldiers on electoral list The official announcement as to who will be Egypt's new president should have been made on Thursday. But then the head of the electoral committee, Farouk Sultan, announced that the results would be published on Saturday or Sunday. The committee says it is still dealing with claims of vote-rigging. There are complaints of vote-rigging As in the past election rounds, there were names on the electoral lists of people who had long since died, and some people were listed twice. The lists also contained names of soldiers - who aren't actually allowed to vote in Egypt. The supporters of Islamist candidate Mohammed Mursi accuse his rival Ahmed Shafiq of allegedly buying votes. Shafiq was the last Prime Minister under ousted President Hosni Mubarak. He in turn accuses Mursi of having preprinted some 1.5 million ballots so that voters had their crosses in the right place. These are some 1.5 million votes that could determine the future of the country. If the electoral committee, made up of former Mubarak supporters, deducts the votes from Mursi's results, then Ahmed Shafiq will become Egypt's new President. Altogether there are some 400 complaints the committee has been dealing with for four days now. But during the first round of the presidential election almost a month ago, the number of appeals was five times higher. Even so, the results were published two days after the polling stations were closed. Mohammed Khalifa from the Muslim Brotherhood is skeptical. "They know who the winner is. And they refuse to publish the result," he says. Muslim brothers stake their claim Mohammed Mursi says he is the legitimate winner... For Mohammed Khalifa, it's clear who won the election. Mohammed Mursi declared himself the winner as soon as polling stations had closed. He said he'd got some 52 percent of votes - a narrow win. But Shafiq also claimed victory, with some 51 percent of votes. The Muslim Brothers meticulously noted down their results - constituency after constituency, polling station after polling station. It's all in one book. The Muslim Brothers have staked their claim, and they're relying on pressure from the public. So what if the electoral committee disallows the Muslim Brothers' votes and what if the Military Council publicly declares Shafiq president? "That would be a military coup," says Mohammed Khalifa. "We wouldn't accept that. We'd take to the streets and start a new revolution." Troop movements ...but Ahmed Shafiq is also claiming victory. The Military Council is aware of that. It seems as if they are publishing the election result late so that they have time to transfer security personnel and military vehicles. The interior ministry is said to have deployed an additional 3,000 soldiers to Suez alone, a town on the Red Sea coast east of Cairo. Officially, their mission is to protect police stations. There are similar reports about a heightened state of security from activists in other places across Egypt. Eye-witnesses also describe having seen dozens of military vehicles on their way from Cairo to Alexandria Wednesday night. On Twitter, rumors are spread that a nationwide curfew may be imposed as soon as the election results are published. That would mean that the police could arrest anyone who dares step on the street. These scenarios are reminiscent of the revolution 16 months ago. Egyptis in political turmoil: night after night, protesters take to Tahrir Square to demonstrate against the dissolution of Parliament and against any restrictions to the president's powers. Meanwhile former President Mubarak is said to be fighting death. But many Egyptians are skeptical, like Badr Mohammed Said, the janitor in the apartment building. "The Military Council is trying to distract us from what's really important." A medical miracle? Are reports about Mubarak's poor health situation a ploy? It does seem a bit suspicious that Mubarak is always close to dying whenever the political situation in the country gets particularly tense, and just ahead of major milestones. In the course of the last three weeks alone, Mubarak almost died three times, according to his doctors. If you trust his lawyer, Mubarak's heart stopped beating seven times over the last 20 days. Plus, he's had two strokes. "I hope that my doctors will be just as efficient when my time comes," jokes @SanumGhafoor on Twitter. These are important days for Egypt, where more is at stake than whether the former ruler will survive or not. The question is whether the army will succeed in holding on to power, or the Muslim Brothers and revolutionaries unite to take to the streets again. These are decisive days. And what if there is a second revolution? "Then we'll barricade our house again", says maintenance man Said. He looks after 42 apartments and intends to protect them all - just like he did 16 months ago. "God willing nothing will happen to us in this house, and God willing, the next revolution would be the real one." Author: Viktoria Kleber, Cairo / nh Editor: Michael Lawton


Opinion: Good Islamists, bad Islamists? How the West responds to Egyptian President Mohamed Morsi will show whether Western countries are serious about supporting democratic movements in the Arab world, says DW's Rainer Sollich. Rainer Sollich from DW's Arabic Department Arms deals with Saudi Arabia, but distancing themselves from Iran and different militant groups, like Hamas or Hezbollah: a casual observer of the West's Middle East policies might get the impression that there is an attempt to distinguish between "moderate" and "radical", or "good" and "bad" Islamists. This impression isn't wrong. But the distinction isn't made based on democratic standards, or human rights records. It depends, instead, on whether the Islamists in question generally respect Western interests, or disregard and fight them. In the aftermath of the Arab Spring, the double standards that people in the region have decried for so long have become obvious once more. The West praises democratic values and advertises them aggressively, but when in doubt, stability and geostrategic interests have a higher value. Saudi Arabia with its strict interpretation of the Sharia and its continuous disregard for human rights is a prime example. And what about Egypt? Morsi takes Western interests into account Mohamed Morsi, Egypt's first, freely-elected president, knows the Western parameters and takes them into account. When he was an activist with the Muslim Brotherhood, he publicly reviled Jews as "blood suckers." Today, as head of state, he's not seriously questioning the peace agreement with Israel, despite all his anti-Zionistic rhetoric. And he's even less inclined to end the partnership with the US, which earns the Egyptian military more than a billion dollars each year. Morsi knows: Egypt needs this money. And he also knows that in the turbulent transition time since the Mubarak regime was overthrown, the West has been tempted to see Morsi, too, as a "moderate" Islamist - a "difficult" but ultimately acceptable partner. At least he was elected democratically. And Egypt pulling out of the pro-West alliance, or destabilizing fully would be a disaster for the West. Signs of a severe crisis abound. Ever since the revolution, Egypt has been in a dangerous downward spiral. No one has a magic cure or panacea - and that includes Morsi's opponents. The president also has not succeeded in keeping the Egyptian people in line during these difficult times. Quite the contrary, his autocratic style of governing has divided the country and led to a dangerous polarization. Against the will of a sizeable minority, he pushed through a constitution that is too religious in the eyes of many Egyptians. He agreed to share power with the country's powerful military, without any democratic legitimization. He actively advances the Islamization of state institutions, and the entire society. Human rights organizations complain that the repression under Morsi is even more brutal than it was under Hosni Mubarak. The West seems meek Western countries have criticized all this only mildly so far. Even if their own interests are touched upon, as was the case with the verdict against employees of foreign foundations, the reactions seem rather subdued. Many Egyptian citizens, however, do not want to put up with Morsi's style of politics any longer. New, large protests have been held and more are planned to coincide with the president's one year "anniversary" in office, and a group of opponents has collected millions of signatures calling for Morsi's ouster. The president, in turn, encourages his supporters to stage protests themselves. So, Egypt, once again, is on the brink of a dangerous escalation of violence. The first deaths from clashes have already been reported. The military takes the present danger seriously, barely masking its threat to interfere, if necessary. It remains to be seen whether Morsi the Islamist should be considered a "moderate" or a "radical" compared to others in the region. He doesn't play with his cards on the table. It is clear, however, that he is overwhelmed with being head of state. In his most recent speech on June 26, he stoked the fires once again by portraying his opponents as enemies of the revolution and of Egypt. It would be disastrous should democratically-minded Egyptians get the impression that the West is again leaving them to their own devices, as it did under Mubarak.


Egypt's army holds crisis talks after ultimatum deadline passes The Egyptian army has been holding talks with opposition and religious leaders about its next steps. A deadline for President Morsi to reach a compromise deal or face an imposed military solution has expired. Opposition spokesman Mohamed ElBaradei, along with Egypt's top Muslim cleric and a Coptic Pope met General Abdel Fattah al-Sisi for talks on measures that the military threatened to impose on Wednesday. In a last minute statement before the military's deadline expired between 4 p.m. to 5 p.m. local time (1400 to 1500 GMT), President Mohammed Morsi criticized the military for "taking only one side." He added that respecting his electoral legitimacy was the only way to prevent violence. The political wing of Morsi's Muslim Brotherhood reportedly refused an invitation to meet with the armed forces commander, and promised to stand firm against any pressure brought by the army for Morsi to step down. In a late night speech Tuesday, Morsi said that he would not resign and that doing so would threaten Egypt's constitutional legitimacy. "The people chose me," Morsi said. "The people designated me through free, clean elections." The president also said he was willing to "give my life" for the sake of Egypt's stability. The Islamist leader was elected in a close runoff with 51.7 percent of the vote last June, becoming the country's first democratically elected president. The opposition Tamarod movement, which organized mass protests on Sunday described by the army as the largest in Egyptian history, said the speech amounted to a threat. For a third consecutive day, thousands of Egyptians took to the streets both to support and oppose the president. In the early hours of Wednesday morning, Egypt's health ministry anounced that unidentified gunmen had killed 16 Morsi supporters and injured 200 more at a rally supporting the president outside Cairo University. This followed several news agency reports, citing medics, of seven deaths in the unrest on Tuesday. As with the public protests that toppled former President Hosni Mubarak during the 2011 revolution, demonstrations in the capital, Cairo, have focused heavily on the central Tahrir Square. hc/mkg (Reuters, AFP; AP, dpa)


Egypt’s opposition, Tamarod, demands President Morsi resign The Egyptian opposition has demanded that President Mohammed Morsi resign by Tuesday, threatening a campaign of civil disobedience if he stays. Meanwhile, several cabinet ministers have resigned amid ongoing protests. Egypt's opposition group, Tamarod, which is Arabic for "Rebel," announced on Monday that they would give President Morsi until Tuesday to resign. "We give Mohammed Morsi until 5:00 pm (1500 GMT) on Tuesday July 2 to leave power, allowing state institutions to prepare for early presidential elections," it said in a statement on its website. If the Islamist leader did not step down, the opposition group said it would begin a "complete civil disobedience campaign.” Protesters on Monday stormed the headquarters of the pro-Morsi Muslim Brotherhood building in Cairo. The building was reportedly ransacked and then set ablaze. It has also been reported that at least four ministers resigned from Morsi's government Monday. An unnamed cabinet official said the head of tourism, communications and information technology, minister of state for legal and parliamentary affairs and the environmental affairs minister all tendered their resignations. Permalink http://p.dw.com/p/18yjL Tamarod has driven most of the opposition protests across Egypt including Sunday's rally that drew hundreds of thousands of people, demanding that Morsi step down on the first anniversary of his inauguration as president. Protesters chanted, "The people want the fall of the regime!" in the capital Cairo, as part of the largest demonstration since Mubarak's ousting in 2011. Security forces have reported that at least 16 people were killed across Egypt on Sunday in clashes between Morsi opponents and supporters. Some spent the night in tents pitched in the capital's iconic Tahrir Square, where they say they will stay until Morsi steps down. Organizers are also calling for sit-ins at several government buildings. Tamarod has been collecting signatures for months calling for Morsi to resign and demanding that Egypt hold new elections. On Saturday, the group claimed that 22 million people had signed their pledge. Morsi has said he will not step down and that street protests cannot overrule the results of a free election. hc/jr (Reuters, AFP, AP)


Morsi defends his position as military deadline approaches The Egyptian army's deadline for President Mohammed Morsi to make a political compromise or face a military intervention is drawing near. However, the president has said he has no intention of stepping down. Mohammed Morsi delivered a late night speech on Egyptian television saying that he would not resign and that doing so would threaten Egypt's constitutional legitimacy. He made no direct mention of an army ultimatum to accept "the people's demands" by Wednesday evening or face an imposed solution, but a separate post on his official Twitter account said that the military should backtrack. In his 45-minute televised speech, where the he often raised his voice or pounded the podium with his fist, Morsi said his office stood for constitutional legitimacy, calling this "the only guarantee against violence." "The people chose me," Morsi said. "The people designated me through free, clean elections." The president also said he was willing to "give my life" for the sake of Egypt's stability. The Islamist leader was elected in a close runoff with 51.7 percent of the vote last June, becoming the country's first democratically-elected president. Morsi also said that any attempt to remove him from office would "backfire on its perpetrators." The opposition Tamarod movement, which organized mass protests on Sunday described by the army as the largest in Egyptian history, said the speech amounted to a threat. "This is a president threatening his own people," Mohammed Abdelaziz, a leader of the Tamarod campaign, told an Egyptian television channel. "We don't consider him the president of Egypt." Clashes continue, mainly in Cairo For a third consecutive day, thousands of Egyptians took to the streets both to support and oppose the president. In the early hours of Wednesday morning, Egypt's health ministry said that unidentified gunmen had killed 16 Morsi supporters and injured 200 more at a rally supporting the president outside Cairo University. This followed several news agency reports, citing medics, of seven deaths in the unrest on Tuesday. As with the public protests that toppled former President Hosni Mubarak during the 2011 revolution, demonstrations in the capital Cairo have focused heavily on the central Tahrir Square. Some protesters at the square began chanting "leave, leave" at the end of Morsi's speech late on Tuesday. The Egyptian army on Monday gave Morsi 48 hours to reach a compromise deal with the opposition or face an imposed military solution. Morsi's Muslim Brotherhood called the announcement a coup, a charge rejected by the army. The military has since released details of its "road map" in the event of intervention, saying it would suspend the country's constitution - narrowly approved in a December referendum - dissolve parliament and set up an interim government led by the country's chief justice. The plans to usher in fresh elections were released first to Egypt's state news agency. msh/dr (AFP, AP, dpa)


Mubarak trial uncertain as top official sentenced to jail Egyptian prosecutors are currently investigating ousted president Hosni Mubarak. But it is still uncertain whether it will lead to the trial so many Egyptians are demanding. An Egyptian court has convicted the once-feared former interior minister on charges of corruption and money laundering. The court in Cairo on Thursday sentenced Habib al-Adly to 12 years in jail. It was the first trial of an official from the regime of ousted president Hosni Mubarak since the former leader was overthrown in February. Adly is separately facing charges that he had ordered the deadly use of live ammunition against unarmed protesters during the 18-day uprising that toppled Mubarak. If convicted, he would face the death penalty. Not only Adly has been made accountable for his role in the deadly shootings of demonstrators during the mass protests against the former regime. The 82-year-old Mubarak is also faced with this accusation. He is allegedly responsible for the deaths of over 800 protestors. The public prosecutor had in fact ordered that Mubarak be taken into custody. The former leader did not land in jail, though, but rather in a hospital due to his poor state of health - in Sharm el-Sheikh near his family's holiday residence. Judicial challenges Many Egyptians would like to see their former president Mubarak made accountable for his actions before a court. Already weeks ago, thousands of citizens gathered in Cairo's famous Tahrir Square to voice their demands. While tens of thousands celebrated Mubarak's fall, there are still demands for justice Generals and the justice system heard their call. Some three months after he was toppled, the public prosecutor has taken up an investigation against Mubarak and his sons Gamal and Alaa for charges including corruption and abuse of power. In the case of a trial, Mubarak could even face the death sentence. It still belongs to the penalties possible in the post-revolution era. But the realization of a fair and independent trial is still anything but simple. On the one hand, the judicial system is confronted with public pressure, outrage and a thirst for revenge within the population. On the other hand, observers assume that influential forces of the old regime are persistently looking to hinder a too detailed reappraisal of the Mubarak era. They themselves could be threatened by any revelations, after all. In addition, Mubarak can only be sentenced according to laws already put in place during his authoritarian rule. "Of course, it's difficult for everything to take place so quickly and efficiently," said Sonja Hegasy from the Berlin-based research institute Zentrum Moderner Orient. "The introduction of the rule of law cannot occur overnight and this is also the case for the proceedings against the Mubarak family." According to Hegasy, a case will require a long process to gather evidence and prepare sufficiently. "It is very important that the trial is afterwards assessed as having been fair and independent," she said. Power of the military The mood in the population could, however, make such a time-consuming procedure difficult. Mubarak remains for many Egyptians a controversial figure, even after his overthrow. In addition to the deadly actions of his security forces against peaceful demonstrators, many are indignant about reports that the Mubarak family managed to safely get their total assets worth some $70 billion (48 billion euros) abroad. In comparison: 40 percent of Egyptians still have to get by with less than $2 a day.  Alaa and Gamal, seen here with their parents, have already been taken into custody  Mubarak himself denies owning any bank accounts, real estate or other assets abroad. Hegasy said the Egyptian judiciary will be dependent on the cooperation of international companies and banks if it wants to succeed in convicting him of self-enrichment. Some experts doubt that it will even come to a trial against Mubarak. Stephan Roll from the German Institute for International and Security Affairs said Mubarak's poor health could be used as a suitable pretense for eventually suspending the case completely. There is no sure knowledge on just how ill Mubarak really is. Rumors of his imminent death already existed during his time in office. According to Egyptian media reports, the former president suffers from pancreatic cancer and serious heart problems. "I think that loyal networks in the military continue to be in place," Roll said. "Even if their voices have become very quiet in Egypt, there are still enough influential people of the old elite who are not interested in seeing Mubarak actually being humiliated by being dragged before a court." On the other hand, Roll said he expected Mubarak's sons to face a trial and be sentenced. This would have a symbolic character. Roll said he saw "strong indications" that the two were in fact involved in economic intrigues. "In the beginning voices in the military leadership were dominating that said we'll try to get one or two scapegoats in order to calm the situation," he said. "But I have the impression that now there are people who are pushing for a reasonably in-depth reappraisal of the old regime." Roll said it shouldn't be underestimated that many voices already existed in the medium-level officers' corps critical of the economic doings of the presidential family. "I think there is by all means a certain amount of pressure in place to deal with these things," he said. Author: Chamselassil Ayari / sac Editor: Rob Mudge


Islamists rally for Morsi in Egypt Egyptian Islamists have rallied to support Mohammed Morsi ahead of opposition protests demanding his removal. Tension has grown in the run-up to June 30, which marks the completion of Morsi's first year in office. Government supporters ferried followers of Morsi's powerful Muslim Brotherhood and 16 other Islamist groups to the capital from several provinces. Some people carried the Egyptian banner and others waved the black flag of jihad. "Morsi is our president and no one else," the demonstrators chanted as they waved pictures of the president and packed the streets around a major mosque in Nasr City in eastern Cairo. The opposition accuses Morsi of failing to fulfill the objectives of the popular revolution that brought him to power. Tamarod (Rebellion), a protest group backed by the main opposition parties, has planned a massive sit-in June 30 outside the presidential palace in Cairo to call for Morsi's resignation and early elections. The June 30 protest campaign comes after a months-long petition drive. Organizers announced on Thursday that they had collected up to 15 million signatures supporting Morsi's removal and an early presidential election. (He had won the presidency last year with just 13 million votes.) In a recent interview, Morsi, Egypt's first democratically elected president, called the demands "absurd and illegal." Still, his first year in power has seen constant political unrest and a sinking economy. Protests and clashes also spread across the country earlier this week after Morsi appointed 17 new governors, 10 of them members of his Islamist bloc. The new governor of Luxor comes from a group that claimed responsibility for the murder of dozens of tourists in 1997. ‘For Egypt's sake' Morsi's supporters have vowed that he will complete his four-year term, and some clerics have called the upcoming protests a "war on Islam." Supporters charge that the opposition has deliberately caused unrest on the streets to undercut the Islamist president's clout. Pro-Morsi banners read, "No to demolition of legitimacy" and "For Egypt's sake, stay at home on June 30." Though supporters dubbed Friday's gathering the "1 million people rally against violence," clerics sympathetic to Morsi's Muslim Brotherhood gave the green light for supporters to fight with the president's opponents, describing the opposition's June 30 protests as "religious war." Supporters and detractors of Morsi have held rival rallies in recent months that have occasionally descended into deadly clashes. On Friday, Morsi's backers and opponents clashed outside a mosque in Alexandria, Egypt's second largest city, the state-run newspaper al-Ahram reported. Both sides threw stones before the opposition forced its rivals to take refuge in the mosque, according to the newspaper, which did not report any casualties. mkg/dr (Reuters, AFP, dpa, AP)


Morsi appoints governor linked to terror in Egypt Egyptians have voiced anger after Mohammed Morsi appointed an Islamist as provincial governor, who is linked to a deadly terrorist attack. Adel el-Khayat said he would not allow politics to influence his decisions. Politicians, residents and activists in the Luxor province said they plan to seal off the office of the governor to prevent Adel el-Khayat from entering. Members of the tourism industry worry about the new governor's potential impact on tourism: The Islamist hard-liner comes from Gamaa Islamiya, a group that claimed responsibility for one of Egypt's bloodiest massacres. "Is it unimaginable that those who plotted, participated or played any role in the massacre of Luxor, become the rulers even if they renounced and repented it," said Tharwat Agamy, the head of Luxor's Tourism Chamber. Gamaa Islamiya waged a bloody insurgency against the Egyptian government in the 1990s, attacking police, Copts and tourists. In 1997, the group claimed responsibility for an attack on visitors to Luxor's 3,400-year-old Hatshepsut Temple (pictured), killing 58 in a stabbing spree and spray of gunfire. More than 1,200 people total died in the campaign of violence led by Gamaa and another militant group, Islamic Jihad. 'Performance and skills' Both groups renounced violence in the 2000s during a crackdown by the regime of President Hosni Mubarak, overthrown in a less-bloody revolution in 2011. Since his removal, both groups have launched political parties. The Gamaa allies with current Islamist President Mohammed Morsi and his Muslim Brotherhood. "I am honored to belong to the Islamist current, but now as a governor I am in the service of the nation," el-Khayat wrote to the Associated Press news agency. "It is not fair to judge someone just because of affiliation but by evaluating their work, performance and skills." El-Khayat said Gamaa hadn't ordered the attack and condemned it afterward. However, the group claimed responsibility for the attack at the time and, two years later, one of its leaders threatened to repeat it. The governor's hard-line ideology also does bodes poorly for a tourist region. His group calls for Shariah law: Islamic dress code for women, alcohol bans, preventing genders from mixing. Tourism has already dropped in the unrest that has followed Mubarak's overthrow, and in Luxor, the main city in a province of about 1 million people, tourism drives the economy. Visitor numbers to Egypt fell to 9.8 million in 2011 from 14.7 million the year before, and revenues dropped 30 percent to $8.8 billion (6.6 billion euros). Last year, visitors got back to just over 10 million, but they concentrated at beach resorts rather than in Luxor's Nile Valley. mkg/rg (Reuters, AFP, dpa, AP)


Demands rising for Morsi to bring justice to Egypt With a general amnesty for revolutionaries and moves to replace the prosecutor general, Egyptian President Mohammed Morsi is trying to reposition himself as a promoter of human rights. But doubts remain. Pressure is building on Egyptian President Mohammed Morsi to bring justice to the many revolutionaries imprisoned since 2011. Thousands of people were arrested during the bloody street battles that took place at the height of the revolution, and many were arbitrarily arrested, beaten and made to face military tribunals that often ignored legal principles and gave few a fair trial. Ibrahim, a 26 year old arrested in February of this year during a street fight with riot police, described how brutal the police can be. "We had already been beaten by the time we arrived at the police station," he said. "It got to the stage where I didn't feel the blows anymore. At first they hit us on the head and arms. Then we got to the Interior Ministry, where we were tortured." Critics say Morsi's amnesty was just meant to boost his popularity Ibrahim was one of the lucky ones - through various contacts, his friends managed to secure his release. But there are plenty more still behind bars, at the mercy of the police. Doubts over Morsi's motives To the surprise of many, Morsi has now declared general amnesty, ordering the release of anyone who was arrested for crimes that "supported the revolution." Mohamed Zaraa of the Cairo Institute for Human Rights Studies cautiously welcomed the declaration. "The decree is a good step towards justice," he said. "But it is too early to judge, because at the moment it is just a piece of paper. We want to see how it is implemented." The non-Islamist opposition in particular doubts that Morsi is interested in finding a legal resolution to the country's violent recent history, or that he wants to strengthen human rights. They think he is more interested in his opinion poll ratings - and to back up their claim, they point to the amnesty's timing: 100 days after Morsi came to power. Though the amnesty did lift his popularity, Morsi's balance sheet after 100 days in office is less than impressive. The president has barely reformed the much-feared interior ministry. The amnesty order was also done in light of a demonstration planned for October 12 at Tahrir Square by non-Islamist opposition groups. Observers like Zaraa believe Morsi made the order in part to relieve pressure from such groups - the protest was supposed to embarrass Morsi by calling for the release of imprisoned demonstrators. "He may have made the declaration to improve his image among the broad range of revolutionary supporters and other civilian groups," Zaraa said. 'The prosecutor general must be prosecuted' Many have protested against Abdel Maguid Mahmoud Morsi's attempt to remove Egypt's prosecutor general Abdel Maguid Mahmoud - who reamined in power from the Mubarak era - could also be seen in the same light. Morsi wants to make Abdel Maguid his ambassador to the Vatican, since sacking him is not legally possible. But the prosecutor general, much resented for his politicized rulings, has so far refused to resign, and defiantly returned to work Saturday. Abdel Maguid came under fire on Wednesday, during a trial of 24 members of the Mubarak regime accused of organizing a deadly attack on demonstrators during the 2011 revolution. All 24 were acquitted for alleged lack of evidence, but many analysts believe that Abdel Maguid acted to protect the defendants by not allowing evidence against them to be presented to the court. Fatah Nour, a 25-year-old supporter of the Muslim Brotherhood, protested at Tahrir Square on Friday to support Morsi's decision. "I demand that the justice system be cleaned up and that the prosecutor general be prosecuted," he said. "I don't think he should be made ambassador." 'We need more than a few decrees' Despite the amnesty and the attempt to remove the prosecutor general, human rights activists accuse the president of neglecting human rights and of failing to reform the police. Neither of the issues was tackled in the Morsi's 100-day program, says Zaraa. "We need more than a decree here or a decree there," he said. "We need a systematic reform of the security sector and a system to work through the past in the legal system." There was violence at Tahrir Square again on Friday Up until now, Morsi has not been able to convince activists and the liberal opposition that he is concerned with more than his own popularity. Because of this and other issues, tensions between the non-Islamist opposition and Islamist Morsi supporters is greater than ever. During a small demonstration on Friday, tensions erupted into violent clashes on Tahrir Square, where more than 100 people ended up getting injured.


Egypt goes from the frying pan into the fire One year ago, it was the scene of jubilant celebrations. Cairo’s iconic Tahrir Square brimmed with Egyptians rejoicing at the election of President Mohammed Morsi and expecting him to deliver on his promises. One year on a potent mixture of crises has left its mark on a deeply polarized country and the euphoria many once felt has turned to discontent. Now, as millions of disillusioned and angered Egyptians have taken to the streets to call for Morsi to step down and the military has threatened to intervene, many say nothing has changed. "He has done nothing," said Alaa Abdel Aziz, who came to Tahrir Square to protest with her family. "And now, all of Egypt is divided. It was never like this before." A year into Morsi's presidency, many say daily life has grown more difficult. Food prices are rising, electricity cuts are commonplace, and the country's economy is in tatters. A recent fuel crisis has exacerbated the situation. Lines of cars at fueling stations snake down streets. In the scorching summer heat, tempers have raged, and police on occasion have had to intervene to prevent fights. Last week a man was shot dead at a gas station dispute in Cairo. "We have problems with gas shortages, with electricity cuts. Business is hard, it's very hard," said Akram Karam, the owner of a souvenir and perfume shop just minutes from Tahrir Square. In a country where tourists once flocked by the millions, continued unrest has scared away tourism and investors. "He's (Morsi - the ed.) not looking to help the Egyptian people. He just cares about the Muslim Brotherhood. He is the same as Mubarak, and we have no freedom," Karam added. More of the same? Others say abuse and repression that was a hallmark of the rule of former President Hosni Mubarak has continued. They will not back down quietly "All this rejection is the result of his own actions," said Wael Eskander, an activist who came to protests at the Presidential Palace calling for Morsi to step down. "The police have been extremely brutal, more so even than under Mubarak, he hasn't respected minority rights, he has been very sectarian. He has alienated everyone." Unlike ever before, discontent has spread across all sectors of society. A recent poll by Zogby Research Services put Morsi's approval rate at only 28 percent, a meager half of what it was when he was elected. But while the president's popularity appears to be waning, Egypt's weak and fragmented opposition parties have not fared much better. The same poll revealed only 34 percent of Egyptians approved of Morsi's opponents, leaving few options. The government has conceded that it has made mistakes, but says the challenges were expected. When Morsi was elected he inherited a failing state, the result of years of corruption. And complicating its attempts for national consensus, says the government, has been the opposition's repeated rejection of calls for talks. For Morsi's supporters on the ground, the president remains Egypt's only legitimate leader, having risen to power through free and fair elections. They too have taken to the streets in large numbers ready to fiercely defend their leader. They believe Egypt has become better, and, rather than seeking Morsi's ouster, they say critics should take their fight to the polls. And while critics have accused Morsi of polarizing the country and alienating all those outside his Islamist base, the government and his supporters dismissed this claim. "At the end of the day, it was very easy for all of us in different segments of the population to agree on what we don't want, to oust someone like Mubarak, whereas it was much more difficult for us to agree on what we do want, and that has kept the public polarized," said Gehad El Haddad, spokesman for the Muslim Brotherhood. "Egyptians have never been faced with the power of choice before. With choice comes the responsibility that you have to be informed." Mixed expectations The euphoria of the revolution two years ago is setting in again  So as protests have erupted across the country, expectations for what will come next remain mixed. The National Salvation Front, the main opposition block that has backed protests, urged all citizens and revolutionary forces to maintain peaceful protests "in all the squares and streets and villages and hamlets of the country, and not to deal with the Brotherhood government until the last of this dictatorial regime falls." As numbers at anti-Morsi protests surpassed expectations in a country otherwise overcome with discontent, many say the euphoria felt during the early days of the revolution has been reignited. "We won't leave until he leaves," chanted protesters in Tahrir Square as others beat drums and waved flags. But underpinning that euphoria was also a foreboding fear of what may come. Some say that while they oppose Morsi, overthrowing him could set a dangerous precedent that would lead to future instability. And the fear of violence that reigned in the lead up to yesterday's protests has continued to loom amid a rash of clashes outside the capital as well as at the Cairo headquarters of the Muslim Brotherhood. Compounding fears of uncertainty in a post-Morsi Egypt has been the inclusion of supporters of the old regime in anti-Morsi demonstrations. An increasing chorus has also called for the return of the military who ruled Egypt with a heavy hand for more than a year following the overthrow of Hosni Mubarak. Now, as the military has warned it will intervene if the government and its opposition do not meet "the will of the people" within 48 hours, celebrations have erupted in the streets. Morsi, meanwhile, has rejected the army's ultimatum saying it will only sow chaos. Now, his supporters have also taken to the streets in protest. So far the protests have been astonishingly peaceful Military takes sides Meanwhile, military helicopters have been flying over Tahrir Square draping Egyptian flags beneath them. Protesters are carrying banners reading "The people and the army are one hand." For many of those protesting, the military is seen as the only savior. "That is the fault of the opposition, they didn't give the Egyptian people an alternative," said Eskander. "But they are criminals, they killed us and tortured us, and I don't want anything to do with the military." Eskander, who vehemently opposes Morsi, says he can understand the protesters but says that there must be a revolutionary alternative. Others warn of forgetting the military's past role. "It's like everyone was sleeping for the past two years," said Mena Ezzat, a dentist who was in Tahrir Square when news of the military's statement broke. "It's like they've completely forgotten."


German-Arab business relations impacted by "Arab Spring" The revolutions in Libya, Tunisia and Egypt have impacted on the entire Arab region. German entrepreneurs initially hoped for a wealth of new opportunities, yet such lofty expectations are now giving way to skepticism. The Arab states, when combined, almost run the economic gamet: From wealthy, highly developed oil-rich countries - mainly in the Gulf region - to mainly agrarian economies with little industrial production in the Maghreb region. What they all have in common is a need for investment in infrastructure and education - and as a population that is young, and growing fast. German entrepreneurs see a lot of potential for business cooperation there. “We have high quality products and offer top-notch service,” Jürgen Hogrefe, who heads of a German consulting company that specializes in the Arab countries, pointed out. “Our products are expensive, but the Arabs know that what we offer is worth the higher price.” Abdulaziz Al-Mikhlafi sees an increase in interest from German companies This he puts down to the expectation that the political transformation would trigger economic reforms too, making the decision-making process more transparent. "If the bidding process for projects is fair and open, then German companies can hope to get more orders,” he said. According to the German statistics office, there has been a marked increase in business relations between Germany and the North African countries following the revolutions in Tunisia, Libya and Egypt. In the first thee quarters of 2012, German exports to the Middle East and North Africa have increased by 19 percent and imports from the region to Germany increased by 22 percent. The bulk of the trade is with oil-rich Libya, which was keen to re-start oil exports and pump the revenues into  infrastructure development in the post-Gadhafi aera. Still, 70 per cent of German trade with the Middle East is with the oil-rich, autocratic regimes in the Gulf region, often considered more stable and reliable as business partners. Hope for economic reforms While western societies as a whole welcome the move towards democracy in Arab countries, they are still waiting to see clear signs of reforms in the economic sector - like a reduction of red tape. But the political transition, according to German businessmen, has not yet had a positive effect on the countries' bureaucracies, where the administrations seem more hesitant than before to give approval to investment plans. The Association of German Industries and Commerce has observed a certain reluctance on the part of German companies when it comes to investing in the Arab World. "Trade relations are booming but companies are holding off a bit before deciding to make investments in the region,“ said Felix Neugart who monitors the region for the Association of German Chambers of Commerce and Industry (DIHK) "We just don't know yet what kind of a legal framework might develop from the political reform process after the rebellion, and this insecurity scares potential investors away." Neugart said German companies remain keen to hold on to the production plants they set up in Tunisia and Egypt despite the political change three. But they are reluctant to open up new ones. Consultant Jürgen Hogrefe expressed concern over the current German reticence to invest more and urged companies to reconsider. Germany, he warned, had been losing ground compared to its competitors. "The Brits, the French, the Americans and South Koreans have built up a large presence there," he said, adding that Germany was losing ground while its competitors were forging ahead. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) has said the new governments in the region tend to spend a large part of their revenues on subsidizing consumer goods rather than investing in infrastructure development. Nemat Shafik, deputy to IMF head Christine Lagarde, calls for an “economic spring” for the Arab World. The Egyptian economist deplored in her blog last year that while political parties had been formed and constitutions drawn up and people were looking to shape a new future, hardly anyone was talking about the economy. What was worse, she wrote, all the economic indicators in countries without major oil reserves were pointing in “the wrong direction.” As a consequence the IMF has repeatedly lowered its growth predictions for the region, currently forecasting an overall annual upswing of 3.3 percent of gross domestic product.


Foreign NGOs must close in Egypt, court rules An Egyptian court has sentenced at least 15 US citizens in absentia to five years in jail and forced the closure of foreign NGOs. Among the NGOs affected is Germany's Konrad Adenauer Foundation. A court in Cairo court has sentenced 43 non-profit workers, among them Egyptians and at least 15 foreign employees of several non-governmental organisations to jail sentences. It has also ordered the permanent closure of branches of several NGOs, including the Konrad Adenauer Foundation (KAS). The Arab Spring in Egypt did more than dissolve Hosni Mubarak's regime. Many other people and institutions got drawn into the revolution's wake, including 44 international NGOs who were accused by Egyptian leaders of intruding in the country's internal affairs. In the final days of 2011, around eight months after Mubarak's regime fell, armed police forces searched the KAS offices in Cairo. They confiscated documents and computers and proceeded to arrest the office director, Andreas Jacobs, who was then interrogated for hours. Jacobs and a second KAS employee were eventually released on 500,000 euros ($654,000) bail and able to leave the country. The charges faced by the two were absurd, says Hans-Gert Pöttering, head of the Konrad Adenauer Foundation, which has close ties to Germany's conservative Christian Democratic Union (CDU). In an interview last week with German public broadcaster ARD, he said the KAS has worked in Egypt "just as has been customary for the last 30 years," and that there have never been complaints about its actions. Pöttering says his organization simply conducts seminars and conferences on topics like "the social economy, developing democracy and the rule of law as well as gender equality." Domestic and foreign NGOs targeted Political scientist Noha El Sebaie, who works with an Egyptian NGO, believes the government wants to consolidate its power by way of the trial against KAS and other foundations. In an interview with DW in July 2012, she said, "The military council is trying to destroy the power of the revolution bit by bit." Her organization, Nahdet El Mahrousa (Renaissance in Egypt), aims to generate interest among young people in cultural and social engagement and has also suffered as a result of foreign NGOs coming under fire. Nahdet El Mahrousa has had to drop projects and cancel conferences because of a lack of financial support from NGOs headquartered abroad. "The foreign NGOs were always the backbone of Egypt's civil society," said Noha El Sebaie. Officials in the North African country have also made moves against domestic NGOs and are currently conducting investigations into the affairs of hundreds of Egyptian groups. Among them are many that document human rights violations. One official's revenge? The motives for the legal proceedings remain unclear. It seems probable that the KAS merely got caught in the wide net cast by Cairo's prosecutors, whose complaints were originally directed against NGOs associated with the United States. Prosecutors said their work had destabilized Egypt during the Arab Spring. Critics accuse Egypt's justice system of acting unpredictably and fabricating charges. At the center of these accusations stands Egypt's Minister of Planning and International Cooperation, Faiza Abu Naga. She is suspected of having embezzled money from benefit payments that came from abroad. In 2004, American foundations began sending their aid money not by way of her ministry, instead sending the funds directly to Egyptian NGOs. Some suggest that the trials represent a personal act of revenge from a corrupt politician. Conciliatory tone But there have been some signs that the conflict between the government and foreign NGOs is easing. After meeting with representatives of Egyptian NGOs, President Mohammed Morsi said, "My highest task with respect to this civil society is supporting it in its work. I am convinced that prosperity and development in Egypt will be on the right path only with the work of NGOs." Some observers have construed Morsi's statement as an admission that his country is dependent upon financial support from abroad. End of the road? Ronald Meinardus, who works for another German organization in Cairo, the Friedrich Naumann Foundation, said to DW in March that he was certain that the Konrad Adenauer Foundation was considering when it will be able to send over its new project director. The issue has indeed been under consideration in Berlin, where KAS has its headquarters. The head of the Africa and Middle East division, Hardy Ostry, had said that he could soon re-open the Cairo office as the organization was keen to build on its work over the last three decades. That seems impossible now the court has ordered the permanent closure of KAS branches.


Germany considers a shift in Middle East policy Two years ago, the fruit-seller Mohammed Bouazizi set himself on fire in Tunisia and ignited the Arab revolutions. German foreign policy is still adjusting to the new situation in North Africa and the Middle East. Where the Arab revolutions are leading is one of the most difficult things for German foreign policy makers to predict. Events in the affected countries have taken a different course than was initially expected. What is clear is that, although the revolutions intended to pave the way for a new order, there's still a long and winding road ahead before this is established. However, according to German Foreign Ministry Spokesman Andreas Peschke, Germany has found its foreign policy course. He says it supported the revolutions from the start. "[The government] has always made it clear that human rights must be respected, even in times of great social upheaval," he wrote in a statement to DW. "New governments must offer perspectives to all social and religious groups and protect their fundamental rights." Self-criticism on human rights Policy regarding human rights needs more attention, say experts However, the revolutions were also an opportunity for Germany to reassess its foreign policy prior to the upheaval. Germany cooperated with the autocrats in Tunisia and Egypt in various fields, including security policy, refugee policy and trade. Hajo Lanz, who heads the Middle East and North Africa Department of the SPD-affiliated Friedrich Ebert Foundation, says there is no need to reproach the German government for having possibly strengthened - or at least helped to maintain - the governments of both countries. "Together with the European Union, however, we placed too much emphasis on certain objectives," he says, listing migration and security as two issues that received a lot of attention while the concerns of the people - human rights, transparency, participation, open political processes, freedom of the media - were put on the back burner. "That is something that can be held against us." Christian Democrat Ruprecht Polenz, chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee of the Bundestag, agrees. He says the German government is currently guided by five policy objectives: economic cooperation, migration and refugee policy, combating international terrorism, gaining acceptance for Israel as a democratic Jewish state with secure borders so that it can live in peace with its neighbors based on a two-state solution, and finally a commitment to modernization, democratization, the rule of law, and human rights. He adds that the government was guided by four of these five goals even before the transformations - however, "interest in modernization and human rights fell by the wayside." Benefiting from the rule of law It is therefore now all the more important to demand human rights and the rule of law, Polenz says. With regard to Egypt, he believes this should be done in the framework of a dialog with the new government. "We are convinced that these values are also in the interests of the Egyptians and meet the protesters' demands for dignity." He points to the field of tourism as an example of the importance of the government itself taking an interest in the rule of law. Visitor numbers will only pick up again if security is restored in the country, says Polenz, adding that "that in turn also depends on other domestic political factors." Germany should consider the effects of arming the Syrian opposition, says Lanz Accordingly, the German government expects that Egypt will become a representative democracy in the broadest sense. "Regardless of the outcome of the referendum, it will be crucial for the political future of the country that all the social and religious groups feel protected and respected by the new constitution," says Foreign Ministry spokesman Peschke. The Syrian knot By contrast, Syria poses a different set of challenges for German foreign policy. Despite ongoing violence, Hajo Lanz believes that intervention there is not advisable. Restraint, he says, is appropriate, given the complex international alliances involved, although he suggests it would be wise to support the opposition alliance established several weeks ago as much as possible. He adds that Germany must also consider arming the opposition: "We need to consider to what extent this will curb the regime's constant military attack, which could almost be called a genocide."  The German government has recognized the Syrian National Coalition as the legitimate representative of the Syrian people. Germany also has concrete expectations of this coalition. Berlin has made clear that it expects the coalition's platform to represent all Syrians, including Christians, Kurds and Alawites, says Peschke. "We also expect the coalition to exert its influence to ensure that there are no acts of violence against civilians or human rights violations." New signal to Israel Berlin's signals to the Israelis and Palestinians are nuanced, but clear Germany also faces challenges when it comes to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. With its decision not to oppose the Palestinians' motion for non-state membership of the UN, but rather to abstain from the vote, Germany sent a clear signal to Israel. Ruprecht Polenz says that Germany acted as it did because, in the resolution text, the Palestinians largely adhered to the premises set out by the Middle East Quartet. In particular, they agreed to recognize the state of Israel within the borders of 1967. In this respect, says Polenz, the motion could be seen as an opportunity to resolve the conflict, and this was what the German government had acknowledged. "You cannot vote against something if it is essentially something you agree with, albeit not identically worded." Lanz also approves of the motion as far as the Arab world's expectations are concerned. "A 'no' would have sent a totally wrong signal here," he said. "A 'yes' was not expected, because it would have been too much of a snub to the Israeli side. But from a German foreign policy point of view, it was about sending signals that are understood correctly."  Germany has partially realigned its foreign policy. In many ways, it continues to follow established principles. Meanwhile, other aspects of policy, such as its position on questions of human rights, are currently being discussed - and challenged.


Migration, security top agenda on Merkel's visit to Tunisia German Chancellor Merkel will meet Tunisian Prime Minister Chahed on the second day of her North African tour. Though Berlin and Tunis have promised to work together, tensions could arise over German deportation policy. In addition to her meetings with top Tunisian leaders on Friday, German Chancellor Angela Merkel will also give a speech to the Maghreb country's parliament as part of a diplomatic visit aimed at strengthening relations between Germany and Tunisia. Merkel has called Tunisia a "hopeful project," reflecting not only Germany's support for Tunisia's strides towards democracy since the Arab Spring revolutions in 2011, which started in Tunisia, but also the importance the chancellor places on Germany's relationship with the relatively stable nation as a means to manage migration to Europe and to speed up deportation processes. Partnership on migration and deportations Though Tunisians comprise a relatively small number of migrants attempting to enter Europe, Tunisian national Anis Amri, the alleged perpetrator of the Berlin Christmas market attacks, was a rejected asylum applicant, which could infuse Friday's bilateral discussions of migration with political tension. Merkel and Chahed lay wreaths at the site of the Berlin Christmas Market attack Merkel, who has described Germany and Tunisia as being tragically connected by the terror attack, will likely reiterate her calls for improved cooperation on faster deportation of rejected asylum-seekers. However, Merkel and Chahed's discussion could be complicated by both countries previous allegations that the opposite party failed to provide the documentation needed to facilitate Tunisians' returns to their homeland. Despite being held in a deportation cell for the maximum time allowed in Germany, Amria was not returned to Tunisia as Tunisian authorities did not issue him the necessary travel and citizenship documents.He had been living in Germany under several aliases. The controversial proposal for migrant holding camps in Tunisia and a migration agreement similar to that between the EU and Turkey are not expected to form part of the two leaders' discussions. Securing the Libyan border In contrast, Tunisia's border with Libya will be a key topic for the two heads of state. The conflict-ridden nation of former dictator Moammar Gadhafi has become a primary entry route for refugees fleeing to the EU. Merkel visited Egyptian President al-Sisi on Thursday Merkel also discussed stemming the migrant flow through Libya in her Thursday meeting with Egyptian President Abdel Fatah el-Sissi on day one of her two-day North Africa trip. While there, she described Tunisia, as well as Egypt and Algeria, as a major regional power with importance influence over Mediterranean migration crisis. Germany largely views Tunisia as a Middle Eastern success story and provides the country of nearly 11 million inhabitants with millions of euro in development aid as well as training for Tunisian security forces. However, international organizations, such as Amnesty International, have accused Tunisian security officials of undermining the country's fledging democracy through torture and human rights abuses. Tunisia also continues to be plagued by low economic growth, high unemployment and a decimated tourism sector. Permalink http://p.dw.com/p/2YZjR cmb/sms(AFP, dpa)


Qatar follows dangerous balancing act The small emirate of Qatar has become a significant player in the Middle East: as a US ally, supporter of the Arab revolutions and Islamist backer. But the responsibility carries many risks. Anyone looking for Qatar on a world map practically needs a magnifying glass to find the small nation. Though the mini-state on a peninsula in the Persian Gulf may be small in size, its political and economic influence in the past years has grown progressively. The basis for this growing clout are the nation's enormous natural gas reserves. Gas revenues are financing huge projects like the 2022 World Cup in soccer, investments in large European companies or financial support for rebel movements. Qatar tops the list of the world's richest countries And there's enough left over for the emirate's 1.9 million people, of which some 300,000 are Qatari nationals. They have the highest per capita income in the world. Revolutionary support In recent years, Qatar has played a key role as a negotiator in regional conflicts, for example in Sudan or in southern Lebanon. Since a wave of revolutions swept across the Arab world, though, the country has taken a clearer stance on its positions. In the Libyan conflict, Qatar at an early stage took sides with the rebels fighting against Moammar Gadhafi. The Arab League's support for a no-fly zone over Libya emerged mainly due to pressure from Qatar and Saudi Arabia. Qatar even took part in the surveillance operation with its own fighter jets. Qatar was the first Arab nation to recognize the National Transitional Council (NTC) in Benghazi. The emirate helped the revolutionaries in marketing Libyan oil. In addition, the Qatari military trained rebel fighters and supplied weapons. These were policies that have paid off. Qatar today is profiting from good business dealings with Libya's new government. In the case of Syria, the emirate has also taken sides with the opposition. In November 2011, Qatar pushed for the suspension of Syria's membership in the Arab League. Qatar's Prime Minister Sheikh Hamad bin Jassim al-Thani, who is also minister of foreign affairs, meanwhile is calling for the deployment of Arab and international troops to stop the bloodshed in Syria. Shift of regional power The reason for Qatar's growing influence is mainly a result of the weakness of traditional political heavyweights in the region, said Guido Steinberg, Middle East expert at the German Institute for International and Security Affairs SWP in Berlin. Egypt was busy with its own problems and dropped out as a traditional leading power. Saudi Arabia suffered from the age and lacking vision of its political elite. And Iraq is still not stabilized enough. Qatar's Emir at the celebrations marking the one-year anniversary of the revolution in Tunisia According to Steinberg, the Qataris were trying to fill "this power vacuum." In the long term, though, Qatar lacked the political and military weight to replace leading powers in the region, he said. Many experts anyway doubt that Qatar supports revolutionary movements out of love for democracy. The country is "not credible," said Hamadi El-Aouni, a Middle East expert at Berlin's Free University. After all, the emirate was anything but democratic. Emir Sheikh Hamad bin Khalifa al-Thani has ruled Qatar since 1995, when he deposed his father in a palace coup - at least without any bloodshed. In terms of legislative power, the country only has an Advisory Council, whose members are named by the Emir. There is no parliament or political parties. "The Emir is not a democrat," Steinberg said. "He wants to use his democratic rhetoric to win over western support for his policies in the region." Al-Thani may support the democratic movements in Libya, Egypt or Tunisia. But when the uprisings spilled over into Qatar's neighboring country Bahrain, he apparently feared for his own power and supported the brutal oppression of the protestors next door. Beneficiary of the Arab Spring Qatar has obviously attempted to benefit from the revolutions across the Arab world. It has thereby mainly supported Islamist powers surrounding the Muslim Brotherhood. The cooperation has a tradition: Qatar has granted Islamists shelter already since the beginning of the 1990s. The Libyan cleric Ali al-Sallabi, who has returned home in the meantime, found refuge in Qatar. The well-known Egyptian television cleric Yusuf al-Qaradawi lives in Qatar, as does Hamas leader Khaled Mashaal. "Qatar and Saudi Arabia advocate an Islamization of the Arab states," said El-Aouni. According to Steinberg, Qatar hopes that the new Islamic-shaped governments would be "better, ideologically conformed partners" than the old republics under Syria's Bashar al-Assad or Egypt's Hosni Mubarak. But this policy is not being met with enthusiasm everywhere. Representatives of Libya's NTC are already complaining that aid from Qatar was mainly benefitting Islamist groups. Steinberg said many Islamist adversaries in Libya, Tunisia and Egypt had become opponents of Qatar in the meantime. The difficult neighbor Iran and Qatar share the South Pars / North Dome natural gas field in the Persian Gulf Qatar could also turn its neighbor Iran into an enemy through its policies. After all, the Syrian regime is Iran's most important ally in the region. "If it should become apparent that Qatar will supply Syrian rebels with weapons on a large scale and Iran will have to do more to help maintain the regime, then larger conflicts can no longer be avoided," Steinberg said. To date, the Qatari leadership has been able to avoid provoking its large neighbor. Qatar shares the largest gas field in the world with Iran. Both countries are therefore dependent on keeping their cooperation as smooth as possible. Qatar hopes for protection from the US military presence in the emirate. Since 2003, the largest regional US air base has been located in Udeid, Qatar. It is clear, however, that Qatar's new political commitment in the region is a dangerous balancing act for the small and vulnerable country. Author: Nils Naumann / sac Editor: Rob Mudge


Egypt presidential candidates vie for revolutionary mantle With the field reduced to two candidates, Egypt's presidential election has shifted to wooing the opposition. But some Egyptians are dissatisfied with the choice between a Mubarak minister and the Muslim Brotherhood. Egypt's two main presidential candidates campaigned for the revolutionary youth vote on Saturday, as the Arab world's most populous nation heads toward a June runoff that is set to pit Hosni Mubarak's last prime minister against the Muslim Brotherhood. Presidential contender Ahmed Shafiq sought to play down his ties to the former regime, promising that Egypt had entered a new era. Shafiq served as ousted president Hosni Mubarak's final prime minister and as commander of the air force from 1996-2002. "I promise all Egyptians that we will begin a new era," Shafiq said. "There is no turning back. We will not re-produce the past." "Your revolution has been hijacked and I am committed to bringing (it) back," he told a news conference. Shafiq won 24 percent of the vote in the presidential election on Wednesday and Thursday, just behind Muslim Brotherhood candidate Mohammed Mursi with 25 percent. They are now seeking the support of the 11 other candidates who did not make it into the runoff. Brotherhood appeals to opposition The Muslim Brotherhood, meanwhile, sought to rally the opposition behind Mursi. The Arab world's most influential Islamist organization painted Shafiq as a threat to the uprising that brought down the authoritarian Mubarak regime in February 2011. "We call on all sincere political and national forces to unite to protect the revolution and to achieve the pledges we took before our great nation," the Brotherhood said in a statement. "Today we face desperate attempts to reproduce the old regime," The Brotherhood added. The Brotherhood hopes to co-opt the backers of Abdel Moneim Abol Fotouh, an independent Islamist. Fotouh, who built a coalition of Islamists and secular liberals, was originally pegged as a favorite in this week's presidential polls, but ended up having a lackluster performance. Difficult choice The June 16-17 runoff election between Shafiq and Mursi presents a difficult choice for many Egyptians who fought to bring down the Mubarak regime. While some fear that a Shafiq presidency would effectively be a restoration of the Mubarak era, they also worry that the conservative Muslim Brotherhood will restrict civil liberties through Shariah law. Mursi (left) paints Shafiq (right) as a threat to the revolution The Muslim Brotherhood already controls half the seats in the Egyptian parliament. Liberal and minority Christian groups also accused the Brotherhood of trying to dominate a 100-member panel charged with drafting a new constitution for the country. An Egyptian court ultimately suspended that body pending further review of its legality. "Do we deliver Egypt to a representative of the old regime, as though nothing had happened, no revolution had taken place?" wrote prominent activist and blogger Omar Kamel. "Or do we satisfy the (Brotherhood)'s greed for power, and give them all but complete control of the country and risk the fate of the revolution to satisfy their ambitions?" slk/msh/jm (AP, AFP, dpa)


Mubarak awaits judgment The former Egyptian president has waited a full year to answer in court. On Saturday his judge will sent a clear message to the country with the verdict. There he lay, the old man on his gurney. He seemed barely able to move, to follow the goings on around him. Observers accuse him of merely faking his infirmity to garner the court's - and the public's - sympathy. But the image's effect is not a show: the man on the stretcher embodied utter powerlessness and helplessness – a shocking impression of someone who, for decades like no other, was the symbol of absolute power to the Egyptian people. Now, before the judge, Hosni Mubarak answered to the citizens of the state, the citizens of a country he had ruled for 30 years. The president behind bars: a stronger symbol of the success of the revolution is hard to imagine. For the first time ever, a former head of state in the Arab world was on trial. The Tunisian President Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali, for example, was sentenced in absentia. Mubarak had to face his judges personally. During his tenure Egyptian politicians enjoyed impunity – now the judicial process against Mubarak shows those days are over. That, explains Mona Abaza, a sociologist at the American University in Cairo, is a liberating feeling for many Egyptians. Three counts Egyptians protested loudly against candidates aligned with former president Mubarak The prosecution accuses Mubarak of three things. The most serious accusation is the responsibility for murder and the attempted murder of hundreds of peaceful demonstrators in Cairo, Alexandria, Suez and other Egyptian cities between January 25-31, 2011 – that crucial week of the Egyptian revolution which resulted in the resignation of Mubarak on February 11. Mubarak was accused of having given the order to violently crack down on protesters. While protesters also died in the days following those listed, due to the government's use of force, the charge is limited to the events leading up to January 31. The second charge revolves around the unlawful exertion of influence in favor of entrepreneur and real estate developer Hussein Salem. This man, according to allegations, purchased property at a price far below market value in the Egyptian spa resort Sharm el-Sheikh for the development of a resort for golf and tourism. In return he is supposed to have given the president several luxury villas. Third, the prosecution accuses Mubarak of having had his hand in Salem's profitable gas business deal in Israel. Elusive evidence The Egyptians, clarifies lawyer Hafez Abu Seada, chairman of the Egyptian Organization for Human Rights, are observing the trial closely. They were particularly incensed by the numerous fatalities in the last weeks of January, 2011. “Most Egyptians expect a harsh judgment against President Mubarak. They're of the opinion that, because of the bloodshed throughout the days of revolution, he must be judged.” Two candidates from a long list of contenders now face each other in a run-off election Whether it will come to that, however, Abu Seada can't say. What can be clearly identified is Mubarak's roll in gas transactions. “Only on this point is there any evidence,” says Seada. As for the other two charges, the lawyer is more restrained. Regarding what is for many Egyptians the most important charge – the ordering of violent measures in the days of revolution – the evidence is sparse.  “One reason is that the two main witnesses, former Defense Minister Mohammed Hussein Tantawi and previous Intelligence Chief and Egyptian Vice President Suleiman, declared in their trial testimony that President Mubarak did not give commands to the interior minister and defense minister to use violent measures against the demonstrators. Allegations of legal inconsistency Egyptians are eagerly awaiting the court's evaluation of the evidence. One thing that disturbs them – completely independent of the judgment – is the fact that Mubarak has to answer before a civil court, while 12,000 demonstrators stand before military tribunals. In military tribunals, the defense has significantly fewer rights than in civil courts. As a result they can neither freely choose their lawyer, nor adequately prepare their defense. Many Egyptians are skeptical with regard to other trials in which officers have to answer for violence. Many of their countrymen, said Mona Abaza from the American University in Cairo, doubt that the trials will be carried out appropriately. Protesters waved their shoes to show their disdain of the election process Again, the judgment against Mubarak may come to nothing. Legally, the events of the revolution and the responsibility of the varied state agencies involved have not yet been clarified. His organization, says Hafez Abu Seada, therefore sees itself as attacking on three fronts. First, they will try to defend the spirit and institutions of a civil society that sees itself under attack. Second, they will work on the development of freedom and civil rights and pursue any relevant debates in Egyptian parliament. Third, they will continue to work on torture cases from the time of the old regime. From the perspective of many protesters, the Egyptian revolution, especially after the first round of presidential elections, has taken a sobering turn. Given the strong symbolism attached to the beginning of Mubarak's trial, it remains to be seen which message will be received at the trial's end. Author: Kerstin Knipp /cd Editor: Gregg Benzow


Protests in Egypt after Mubarak evades noose Egyptians filled the streets of their country in protest on Saturday after a life sentence was delivered to former president Hosni Mubarak and his security chief. Many Egyptians had wanted to see Mubarak put to death, which was also the demand of the prosecution. Mubarak was convicted of complicity in the killings of almost 850 protesters during an 18-day uprising against his rule early last year. He was acquitted of a corruption charge. A senior lawyer for Mubarak's defense team said he intended to appeal the court decision. Mubarak's former interior minister, Habib al-Adli, was also handed a life sentence in connection with the killings, which occurred during a crackdown on dissent that came in the early days of the uprising. Six senior police officers, also on trial, were acquitted - adding to the protesters anger on Saturday. Back to Tahrir Square Many of the protesters gathered in Tahrir Square, the same place where demonstrations early last year led to the end of Mubarak's regime. Mohammed Mursi, the Muslim Brotherhood's candidate for president in Egypt's upcoming presidential election, joined the demonstrations in Tahrir Square. Earlier in a press conference, he told Egyptians to keep up their efforts in the "revolution." "All of us, my brothers, must realize in this period that the continuation of the revolution, and the revolutionaries staying put in their positions in the squares, is the only guarantee to achieve the goals," he said. Upcoming vote Mubarak is the only leader toppled in last year's Arab Spring to be put on trial. He is also the first former leader in the history of Egypt to be put on trial by his own people. His trial comes at a politically sensitive time for Egypt, with a fortnight to go before the run-off in the country's presidential election. The second-round vote pits a former prime minister under Mubarak - Ahmed Shafiq - against Mohammed Mursi, the candidate from the political party of the Muslim Brotherhood, which was banned under Mubarak. Once a winner from the polls has been determined, the military council, which has ruled the country since Mubarak was toppled, is supposed to hand over power. mz,pfd/jm (Reuters, dpa, AFP)


To mark two years since Mubarak, Egypt protests anew Egyptians have marched for change to mark two years since Hosni Mubarak's ouster. The authoritarian president fell in an 18-day popular revolt; now the country remains restless under new President Mohamed Morsi. Egypt's vast opposition called for a day of protests Monday, demanding that President Mohamed Morsi fulfill the goals of the revolution that brought him and his Muslim Brotherhood to power. Protesters have demanded a new unity government, amendments to Egypt's new constitution, drafted by an Islamist-led panel, and that the prosecutor general be replaced. "The revolution continues," some banners read, as some protesters chanted: "After blood has been spilled, there is no legitimacy." "Down with Brotherhood rule," others said, making their way to Cairo's Tahrir Square: the symbolic heart of the 2011 protests that toppled Mubarak. Other placards read "Bread, Freedom, Social Justice" or, simply, "leave" - a throwback to the Mubarak-era demonstrations but aimed this time at Morsi. Other marchers headed to the presidential palace, where violent protests have been staged against Morsi. And earlier in the day Monday, some peopel briefly blocked a major bridge while a group wearing masks stopped trains in a central Cairo metro station, scuffling with passengers and transit police. Still seeking change Morsi won a narrow majority, claiming just under 52 percent of the vote, in a presidential runoff election against Ahmed Shafik in June 2012. Activists have expressed their anger over continued rights violations by security services, including the deaths of dozens in recent months, and claim that little has changed since Mubarak. They accuse Morsi and the Muslim Brotherhood of trying to monopolize power, saying the country's most popular political grouping is ignoring the demands of the secular and liberal organizations who were insturmental in toppling Mubarak. Egypt has seen steady violence since protests began to mark the two-year anniversary of the uprising's beginning on January 25. The violence increased with riots in the Suez Canal city of Port Said when a court sentenced 21 local soccer fans to death for their roles in a riot last year that killed 74 people. Protesters also claim that Islamists rushed the country's new constitution through the approval process despite disagreements with the opposition, who say some clauses undermine freedoms of expression, religion, and women's rights. The contentious document was approved by a 64-percent margin in a December 2012 referendum, though less than one in three eligible Egyptians turned out to vote. Opposition activitsts in Egypt also want a new Cabinet, accusing the government of failing to rein in police brutality or institute economic reforms. Members of April 6, a group key to the uprising, rallied outside the office of the chief prosecutor - appointed by Morsi - who they accuse of punishing protesters while turning a blind eye to police transgressions. People also staged a Monday march in the coastal city of Alexandria, another site of deadly clashes between protesters and Morsi supporters in recent months. Local television showed demonstrators carrying pictures of some of those killed in the violence over the past two years. mkg/msh (AFP, AP, dpa)


Making fun of Morsi becomes riskier in Egypt Egyptians love to have a good laugh. Since the fall of Hosni Mubarak they've relished the fact that they can now voice their humor publicly. As it turns out, though, they might not be able to do so with impunity. Egyptian dictator Hosni Mubarak was the subject of many an unkind word before his fall. Though the jokes were usually told in trusted circles only, they were known to many, and fear of reprisal engendered inventiveness. To avoid mentioning Mubarak by name, the president was called "la vache qui rit" ("the laughing cow"), a reference to a type of French cheese. The fear only disappeared with the advent of the revolution. Today, political satire can be found in the media, on the Internet, on social networks or even on protestors' signs at demonstrations. Morsi and satire Egyptians are known for their humor, wit, and their ironic self-deprecation. Even at Tahrir Square, in the midst of the revolution, there were signs that read: "Mubarak, out! My wife's having a baby, but it refuses to be born as long as you're president!" Nor is the new president being spared. Mohamed Morsi is a beloved subject for caricature and satire. The broadest target is Morsi's religiously-tinged policies and the influence of the Muslim Brotherhood on his political and economic decisions. Morsi is pictured alongside Egypt's former dictator on the streets After Morsi's first speech before the presidential vote - a speech in which he clarified his political platform - jokes about his speech rippled through the media. On Facebook, someone posted the joke: "After 100 days in office the president holds a speech before his people. In it, Morsi speaks of the poor economic conditions of his land and promises, 'By God, since I began governing not one cent has gone into my own pocket.' The people answer. 'Mr. President, it's the same for us!' " Some satirists render Morsi as something of a new "pharaoh" due to his attempts to consolidate the judiciary and legislative powers under his own executive control. The pharaoh reference is unflattering, particularly since Mubarak was popularly called a pharaoh as well. Another common joke on the street is this: "A guy asks his friend, 'Have you seen that the pharaoh is risen again?' 'You don't say,' the friend replies. 'You mean the one that the Salafists are pulling around by the nose?' " Religious influence in everyday life Islam's influence on Egyptian politics has increased The fear that religion could play a dominant role in the day-to-day lives of Egyptians is also greeted with humor. Many religion-themed jokes have been circulating on Facebook: "Job listing for a public television channel: Presenter - no older than 20 - with at least 21 years' experience wearing head scarves." Another entry reads: "On the highway from Alexandria to Cairo a man is stopped by the traffic police for driving over the speed limit. He shows his license and registration and asks the officer how much the fine will be. The police officer laughs: 'Brother, those kinds of fines belong to the past. That's from Mubarak's time.' The driver then asks, 'And how is it with Morsi?' 'Oh, it's enough of you cite a Surah (a chapter of the Koran). God will forgive your act,' the policeman answers.' " The political influence of the Muslim Brotherhood and its holy guide, the "Murshid," is well known to Egyptians. Reactions to the perception that Morsi is a puppet of the Murshid can be seen on satire sites all over the Internet. One cartoon shows Morsi giving a speech to the people while holding a scrap of paper in his hand, murmuring, "Before I speak any gibberish and annoy the Murshid, I prefer to learn the text by heart." Others mock the results of the revolution against Mubarak's rule in Egypt. One particular joke has spread across Facebook: "Dear revolutionaries, we now know the true reason for our revolution against Mubarak. He didn't pray publicly and didn't rule according to the Sharia." The consequences of humor Actor Adel Imam is facing charges of blasphemy For his supporters, Morsi is a religious leader as well as a political one, and his critics are insulted as blasphemers. Caricaturists, satirists, journalists, and actors have even been brought to trial. Newspapers recently reported that the attorney general had ordered an investigation into an accusation made against well-known TV presenter Basem Yusuf. The charge is that, on his show on a private television channel, Yusuf accused Morsi of aspiring to dictatorship. A lawyer belonging to an Islamist party interpreted the moderator's joke as an insult to the president and filed suit. The comedian and actor Adel Imam was also charged with blasphemy for some of the films and stage shows in which he criticized Islamic radicalism. Many still believe in their newly-won freedom, and hope that the Arab spring will bring a political shift. But many also fear that Mubarak's dictatorship might be replaced by a religious one. Yet one thing Egyptians will preserve is their sense of humor.


Merkel urges Morsi to foster political dialogue in Egypt German Chancellor Angela Merkel has given a press conference alongside visiting Egyptian President Mohammed Morsi in Berlin. Merkel encouraged political dialogue in the restive Middle East country. Merkel also called for the promotion of human rights and religious freedoms in Egypt, a country rocked by internal violence that has claimed more than 50 lives in the past week. "One thing that is important for us is that the line for dialogue is always open to all political forces in Egypt; that the different political forces can make their contribution; that human rights are adhered to in Egypt and that of course religious freedom can be experienced," the German chancellor said at the joint press conference on Wednesday. Morsi had flown to Germany to demonstrate to Europe his democratic credentials, but amid political tension back home, he limited his visit to a few hours and canceled a planned leg to Paris. The Egyptian president responded to Merkel by saying dialogue was possible and that Egypt would be a state based on the rule of law, not run by the military. But he refused to give a commitment sought by the Egyption opposition for a national unity government, saying Egypt's new parliament would decide after elections expected in April. Morsi also called for an expansion of German-Egyptian relations, but protested against "interference in internal affairs." Unrest in Egypt The Egyptian president has faced months of protest in his own country, including disapproval from liberal and youth groups opposed to a new Islamist-backed constitution he helped to usher in late last year. On Tuesday, Egypt's army chief warned that the country was on the brink of collapse if Morsi's opponents and supporters did not end street battles. In response to particularly bloody violence over the past week in the canal cities of Port Said, Suez and Ismailiya, Morsi declared a 30-day state of emergency and night curfew that extended to their surrounding provinces. He said Wednesday the measures "serve the safety of the residents in order to put an end to criminal attacks." Morsi added that "as soon as the situation stabilizes the measures will be revoked." 'Taken out of context' When asked in Berlin about controversial, vitriolic remarks Morsi made against Jews and Zionists in 2010 that surfaced this month, the president replied by saying they had been taken out of context and that he respected all religions. "I am not against the Jewish faith, I am not against Jews who practice their religion," Morsi said. "I was talking about the practices and behavior of believers of any religion who shed blood or attack innocent people or civilians. That's the behavior I condemn." "I am a Muslim," he added. "I'm a believer and my religion obliges me to believe in all prophets, to respect all religions and to respect the right of people to their own faith." dr/ipj (Reuters, dpa, AP)


Arab Spring for German political foundations? After an Egyptian police raid, German political foundations in Cairo are preparing to get back to normal business. But in a country with a shifting political landscape, it means the foundations will have to change too. For the staff in Cairo, Egypt, it came as a shock when, in December 2011, armed police officers entered the offices of the Konrad-Adenauer Stiftung (KAS), a German political foundation. They confiscated computers, took files and led office manager Andreas Jacobs out of the building. They then questioned him over a period of hours. The raids had initially targeted American foundations, but during police investigations the German KAS also came under scrutiny. In the criminal case brought against Jacobs, the KAS is accused of having used foreign funds without first informing Egyptian authorities. The accusations were met with sharp criticism in Germany, particularly in the Bundestag, the lower house of parliament, where parliamentarians responded with outrage. In a statement released in February 2012, members of the Bundestag called the accusations both baseless and absurd. Calming down Andreas Jacobs in front of the Cairo office that was raided by Egpytian police Now, tensions seem to have eased, even if court proceedings against office manager Jacobs have not been halted. During Mohammed Morsi's recent visit to Berlin, Chancellor Angela Merkel reassured the Egyptian president that any work done by the KAS in Egypt in the future would be based on the German-Egyptian cultural accord. The move is an attempt to ensure greater legal security for the foundation and its work in Egypt. The KAS, which is closely aligned with Chancelor Merkel's Christian Democrat Union, could therefore soon resume its work. Roland Meinardus, who manages the regional office of the Friedrich Naumann Foundation for Freedom (FNF) in Cairo, believes that it will soon be business as usual once more. "The KAS will soon be able to start thinking about when their next project leader will be sent to them," Meinardus said in an interview with DW. Germany's unique foundations That would once again bring the total of German political foundations represented in Egypt to four. In addition to the KAS and the FNF, the Friedrich-Ebert-Stiftung - closely aligned to the Social Democratic Party of Germany - and the Hanns-Seidl-Stiftung - with links to the Christian Social Union in Bavaria - also have offices in Cairo. Ronald Meinardus's foundation has seen its work restricted due to raids For Egyptians, says Roland Meinardus, it's not very easy to understand what these foundations are trying to accomplish. "The problem is that, internationally, such institutions are quite unique." The organizations are as much think tanks as they are consultancies. They organize conferences, exhibits and congresses; provide education programs for students, politicians and media representatives; and bring experts to the country. They have been active in Egypt since the 1970s. "What we want to achieve there is the development of a mature and informed public," says Andreas Jacobs, former manager of the Cairo office of the KAS. The goal is to educate and better equip individuals to develop opinions and think politically. Over the past decades the focus of the foundations' work has shifted. At times, the spotlight was on universities and at other times on women's rights or the rule of law. Different priorities Such topics are not only current, but "very important," said Andreas Jacobs, "especially in the aera of the social market economy in the wake of the revolution. There are massive imbalances in this country. Investors are staying away and the value of  the pound is sinking." According to Jacobs, the task of the German political foundations - together with domestic partners - is to discuss which measures will boost the economy and help its people, as well as how Germany might be able to help. Roland Meinardus also believes that, as a political foundation, one has to remain flexible. "We do think hard as to how we'll fit in the new Egypt. Not only Egypt has changed. I'm convinced that we also have to change." In the wake of Egyptian raids on KAS and US foundations, the Friedrich Naumann Foundation scaled down its work - even though the foundation was not directly impacted by the raids. The now-empty offices of the KAS, one of 17 rights groups and NGOs raided by Egyptian police New goal groups Meinardus would now like to work on developing a working relationship with Islamist groups. His foundation had previously neglected to do so after being inofficially banned from establishing such contacts. As a result, the foundation was unable to reach a large portion of the Egyptian public. "We now have established first contacts. This is all new territory," he said. He hopes the Egyptian public reacts positively to this new initiative. The foundation, he says, will continue to require political support based on agreements with ministries and relevant institutions in both countries. The German Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperation and Development will continue to provide financial support to the foundation. In 2011 it contributed six million euros toward the promotion of democracy and independent media throughout the region. The largest proportion of these funds went to the political foundations that were already on the ground.


Egypt's Morsi takes on sweeping powers Egyptian President Mohammed Morsi has decreed constitutional changes granting himself far-reaching powers. He has also fired the country's chief prosecutor, a move likely to cause further conflict with the judiciary. The Egyptian leader on Thursday decreed, among other constitutional amendments, that all decisions he had taken since taking office in June could not be appealed in court or by any other authority. A constitutional declaration read out on television by spokesman Yasser Ali stated that Morsi "can issue any decision or measure to protect the revolution." "The constitutional declarations, decisions and laws issued by the president are final and not subject to appeal," the declaration continued. Morsi also granted immunity both to the constituent assembly drafting a new Egyptian constitution and to the upper chamber of parliament from any possible court decisions to dissolve them. Both bodies are dominated by Islamist allies of the president. Egypt's Supreme Constitutional Court is expected to rule on the legality of the assembly in December. Several members of the assembly have recently withdrawn from it in protest at what they have said were attempts by Islamists to fashion the constitution to their own ends. Tense relations Morsi's relations with the judiciary have been strained since his aborted attempt to reinstate the Islamist-controlled parliament after it was invalidated by the Supreme Court in June. In another move that could aggravate these tensions, Morsi also sacked Prosecutor-General Abdel Meguid Mahmud, replacing him with Talaat Ibrahim. Morsi failed to dismiss Mahmud last month. The president also ordered new investigations into the death of protesters killed in a popular revolt against the regime of Hosni Mubarak more than a year ago. It is not clear whether the decision will affect the case of Mubarak, who is serving a life sentence in prison for complicity in the killing of more than 800 protesters. Mohamed ElBaradei, a leading opposition figure and Nobel laureate, has criticized the constitutional amendments. "Morsi today usurped all state powers and appointed himself Egypt's new pharaoh. A major blow to the revolution that could have dire consequences," ElBaradei wrote on his Twitter account on Thursday. tj/lw (dpa, AFP, AP)


Economy trumps religion in Egypt's election Egyptians have started two days of voting for a new president. Unlike last year's parliamentary elections, economic issues - not religious ones - are foremost on voters' minds. The nose is a striking organ. More than most other parts of the face, it lends to a person's profile, can be more - or less - attractive. But in this case, the question is whether it's right to take the nose on your face and change its appearance with the help of a plastic surgeon. The question gets contentious if you regard the nose as a small but clearly thought-through part of the human body as divinely created. Is it up to humans to change what God made? That's the question some religious voters in Egypt had to think over ahead of parliamentary elections when a candidate for the ultra-conservative Salafists first had a nose job and then claimed the visible scars were actually the consequences of a robbery. Lying and altering God's creation - a double set of sins that left some Salafists doubting their moral standards. Disappointment with religious candidates It's occurrences like these that made more than a handful of voters rethink their intentions to vote for religious-conservative politicians, according to Dalia Ziada, executive director of the Ibn Khaldun Center for Development Studies. Egyptians had voted for Islamic candidates mainly because they wanted morally irreproachable politicians, Ziada said, adding that people thought religious candidates - unlike other politicians - were not corrupt, would not lie or do wrong. Dalia Ziada: Egyptians are rethinking their support for religious candidates But now with presidential elections looming, it has become clear to many voters that religious candidates do not behave differently from secular ones. "What was brought to light for a lot of voters was that the Islamists, contrary to their assumptions, were not the best choice," Ziada said. "They are not less corrupt than other politicians." Surveys conducted by the Ibn Khaldun Center showed that secular candidates are gaining in popularity, Ziada said. Priority given to economic issues The presidential elections in Egypt, scheduled for May 23 and 24, are taking place under very different conditions than November's parliamentary poll. While ideological and religious issues dominated campaigning then - with the Muslim Brotherhood and the Salafists emerging as the strongest groups - now many of Egypt's 52 million voters are focusing on economic issues, according to Thomas Demmelhuber, a political science professor at the University of Hildesheim Foundation. Though the most recent set of data indicated an improving economic situation, the country is struggling with massive problems. Thomas Demmelhuber: Egyptians want noticeable improvements in post-Mubarak life "Voters are mainly interested in a socio-economic revolution dividend," Demmelhuber said. "They want to be doing better than they were under the autocratic Mubarak regime. That makes negotiations with international and regional donors so important, because without them Egypt would be facing national insolvency." Public safety is also on voters' minds. After the revolution many police quit their jobs, leaving a safety vacuum that the military was only able to fill in a rudimentary way. "Most Egyptians are looking for more stability and security because these are the foundation of doing normal business and a normal public life," Demmelhuber said. Most of the 13 candidates for president represent secular viewpoints. The religious camp is represented by Abdel Moneim Abol Fotouh, an independent who had ties to the Muslim Brotherhood; Mohammed Morsi, the Brotherhood's candidate; and Abdulla Alashaal of the Salafist Authenticity Party. Filling the political vacuum Among the main secular candidates are Amr Moussa, the former general secretary of the Arab League and former President Hosni Mubarak's foreign minister; Ahmed Shafik, an air force general and Mubarak's last prime minister; and Hamdin Sabahi, who led the Egyptian opposition ahead of the revolution. Amr Moussa and Abdel Moneim Abu Futuh stand good chances of winning Should voters lend their support to secular candidates, the people who first took to the streets in protest will be the ones putting their mark on the new president's office. Their religiously neutral demands and inter-confessional alliance had garnered during parliamentary elections. Demmelhuber said the protesters' failure' during the election was due to the fact that they were unable to turn their protests into an organized institution the public could vote for. "They left the political vacuum to be filled by better-organized political actors and the consequence was that representatives of political Islam won a clear victory," he added. Now there is a chance that secular concerns will find more support. The atmosphere in Egypt has quieted down. Half a year after the parliamentary elections, more Egyptians are paying closer attention to how realistic a candidate's political plans are, aware of the fact that their country cannot afford an experiment. Author: Kersten Knipp / sms Editor: Simon Bone


Poverty, disillusionment drive Egypt's protests For over a week, street fighting has raged between Egyptian police officers and demonstrators. Increasingly willing to turn violent, the young protestors are often poor and feel abandoned and oppressed by the state. Mohamed is 15. He's wearing safety goggles and a gas mask while he stands at the entrance to a street in Cairo that runs along the Nile. Hundreds of demonstrators are fighting here with the paramilitary police, and Mohamed is among them. Most are young - some even significantly younger than he is. They hurl rocks or Molotov cocktails at the officers clothed in black. The police respond with tear gas grenades, rubber bullets and sometimes even with real ammunition. For Mohamed, one thing is clear: "It wouldn't work peacefully. The police would just attack us if we didn't defend ourselves - so that's why we use violence. I've been here for a week. In the past, I've been at the fights in front of the presidential palace and was there when the revolution broke out at Tahrir Square." Protesters said they are the ones protecting Egypt The young protester is wearing red pants, caked with dirt and worn out. He's from a poor neighborhood in Cairo, where he lives with his brother. Their parents are both dead. However, he said he spends most of his time at Tahrir Square, the massive public gathering spot in downtown Cairo. Mohamed said former President Hosni Mubarak and his successor, Mohammed Morsi, have destroyed Egypt. "I'm from a poor family - we have nothing," said Mohamed. "That's why we come here and fight for our rights. We're people and not animals. I hope that we get an honest country." Dissatisfied with the state Many demonstrators can relate to what Mohamed describes. They have little to lose, are poor and enjoy few rights - including little protection against arbitrary arrests. Everyone is aware that the protestors cannot afford lawyers who would defend what civil liberties they have. As such, frustration with the state is running high. It's no surprise then that Mohamed thinks little of the government, and he claims that state officials live on the backs of Egypt's populace. Despite being young, he reflects before answering questions and can ground them in a wealth of life experience. It would be a mistake to see him as a criminal as opposed to someone resolved to improve his lot in life. The interview with Mohamed is interrupted by a series of explosions. The tails of tear gas shots are visible, and within just a few seconds, the entrance to the street is hardly visible. Demonstrators run and scream. A young woman wearing a head scarf stumbles into view and passes out. One of the boys grabs her by the arm and runs to the nearest ambulance. Confrontations between protesters and police have lasted all week A fellow protestor is 23-year-old Hossam, and he made it out practically unscathed - just with burning eyes: "We've been hitting the streets for two years now because we want justice and freedom, but the police are still fighting us. Two years ago, a friend of mine was murdered by police officers. Compared with bullets, stones and Molotov cocktails are peaceful. A lack of answers Hossam stands out among his poorer peers. His expensive sneakers and new clothes indicate that he's among the middle class - from which a small minority of protestors also hail. Hossam said he has no patience left for political negotiations. Instead he said he is seeking a "revolutionary solution." He wants the president to resign and face punishment for the murders of the many dead demonstrators, Hossam said. Lofty targets, but when it comes to realistic answers to Egypt's problems, he has less to say. Mostafa, 24, is an acquaintance of Hossam's and has a clear explanation for the increasing turn to violence among protestors: "No one has given any answers or even taken up the issue of their demands or recommendations." Who's behind the black bloc? Recent weeks have seen the emergence of a so-called black bloc among the protestors. As with similar groups in Europe and the United States, the group covered themselves in black clothes and masks. The bloc's members say they are prepared to overthrow the president and the Muslim Brothers, using violence if necessary, but it is unknown who's behind the group. Police - and military troops - have been out in large numbers in Cairo Their style of clothing has already achieved much popularity, and many other protestors have adopted it even though they do not necessarily belong to the bloc itself. But when it comes to broader issues raised by the organization, protestors are divided. Mostafa said he sees nothing problematic with the group: "They're not going to do any damage. They just want to do something good for the Egyptian people. The government isn't living up to people's expectations, and so that's why a few people have taken matters into their own hands and formed the black bloc." But there are skeptical voices, as well. Some argue the protestors swathed in black are merely a government tool to justify fighting demonstrators off more aggressively. The Muslim Brothers have said the black bloc is responsible for some of the most recent outbreaks of violence. On Tuesday (29.01.2013), Egyptian public prosecutors declared the organization a terrorist group whose members should be imprisoned. Since many protestors wear black, some fear that declaration in conjunction with the state of emergency decree in Egypt could result in a free pass for arrests.


Cairo protesters stage sit-in, Morsi defends decrees Opponents of Egyptian President Mohamed Morsi's seizure of powers held a sit-in in Tahrir Square in Cairo. Morsi told fellow Islamists at a rally Friday that he was maintaining "political stability." The United States, the European Union and the United Nations said presidential decrees issued by Morsi - ostensibly to remove hitches in Egypt's transition to democracy - were counterproductive. Morsi defended his moves as his supporters rallied outside his presidential palace, saying it was his "duty to continue the march of the revolution," in a reference to the popular revolt that toppled former president Hosni Mubarak in February 2011. Morsi defended his constitutional intervention at a supporters' rally He promised judicial independence - although the new decrees guards him from court oversight - but said he would uncover allegedly corrupt elements in the judiciary. As Morsi spoke, police clashed with protestors near Tahrir Square while former senior UN official Mohamed ElBaradei in a social network message accused Morsi of appointing himself as "Egypt's new pharaoh". His opponents called for mass protest next Tuesday. 'Temporary dictator,' say critics The independent Egyptian daily newspaper Al-Masry Al-Youm ran a headline "Morsi a 'temporary' dictator". His decrees followed walkouts by liberals, Christians and others from an assembly tasked with drafting a new constitution prior to fresh elections. They had accused Islamists of ignoring their submissions about balancing powers. In Alexandria, north of Cairo, protestors ransacked an office of the Muslim Brotherhood in which Morsi has his roots. Opponents and Morsi supporters clashed elsewhere in Alexandria, leaving 12 people injured. Party buildings were also targeted by protestors in Port Said and Suez. Near Tahrir Square in Cairo, protestors chanted "Down with Morsi Mubarak." Some, in a sign of unity between Egypt's Muslims and Christian minority, waved copies of both the Quran and Bible. The United States, which had praised Egypt's new Islamist-led government for its mediating role in the ceasefire on Wednesday between Israel and Gaza militants, said Morsi's decrees raised "concerns for many Egyptians". "One of the aspirations of the revolution was to ensure that power would not be overly concentrated in the hands of any one person or institution," said US State Department spokeswoman Victoria Nuland. Complete process, says EU In Brussels, a spokesman for EU foreign policy chief Catherine Ashton said: "It is of utmost importance that the democratic process be completed in accordance with the commitments undertaken by the Egyptian leadership." Amnesty International slammed Morsi's new powers, saying they "trample the rule of law and herald a new era of repression." Thursday's decrees effectively place the president above judicial oversight until a new constitution is ratified. During Egypt's popular uprising early last year some 850 protestors were killed in clashes with security forces of the former Mubarak-led government. ipj/hc (dpa, AFP, Reuters)


Egypt's president calls vote on contested constitution Egyptian President Mohammed Morsi has called a December 15 referendum on a constitution drafted by the Islamist-led assembly. The decree follows mass protests against the country's new constitutional charter. Morsi called the referendum on Saturday after Egypt's assembly handed its final draft of the planned new constitution to the president for final approval. It is now expected to go to a popular referendum within two weeks. The document has met with both internal and international protest. Opposition activists say the draft constitution, which was adopted following a marathon overnight session that ended in the early hours of Friday, raises serious concerns about human rights, including religious freedom. Among the provisions of the draft is an article that was retained from the old constitution, which defines “the principles of Shariah” as the main source of legislation. It also adds new Islamic references. The draft also includes a provision limiting any single president to just two, four-year terms and some civilian oversight of the country's military. Amnesty International released a statement on Saturday saying the draft "raises concerns about Egypt's commitment to human rights treaties," and, "in the name of religion," ignores gender equality and restricts freedom of expression. On Sunday, the country's highest court, the Supreme Judicial Council, said it was delaying a session to examine the legality of the constitutional assembly. Hundreds of Islamists gathered outside the court in protest against the session. The court cited "administrative" reasons, and did not set a new date to convene. 'Half-baked' Thousands converged on Cairo Saturday in a show of support for Morsi, the recently passed draft constitution and a series of sweeping new powers he has gained through a recent controversial decree. The decree, passed on November 22, offers him immunity from judicial review of his actions, and legal immunity for the Islamist-dominated assembly that drafted the new constitution. The rally, centered outside Cairo University, was called by Morsi's Islamist allies. Pro-Morsi protests were also staged in the Mediterranean city of Alexandria and the central province of Assiut. Opposition protesters countered with demonstrations in Cairo against the president. The opposition called the new draft constitution, hastily adopted early Friday morning, "flawed" and "half baked." One demonstrator died and 24 were injured when a tree fell near the stage near the university. Claiming the revolution The National Rescue Front - a coalition led by dissident former UN nuclear watchdog chief Mohamed ElBaradei, ex-Arab League chief Amr Moussa and former presidential candidate Hamdeen Sabahi - has called on opponents to keep the pressure up. The group called for Egyptians to "reject the illegitimate" decree and the "void" draft constitution, stressing the right "to use any peaceful method to protest including a general strike and civil disobedience." In an interview broadcast Thursday, Morsi said his new powers would expire once the constitution was ratified, which Islamists cite in his favor. The Muslim Brotherhood, which fought alongside the secular opposition in the Tahrir Square protests of 2011, has since branded the opposition enemies of the revolution. mkg/ccp (AFP, Reuters, dpa, AP)


Morsi refuses to relent Egyptian President Morsi's speech in Cairo disappointed the opposition. After violence against demonstrators at the Presidential Palace, many call his offer of dialogue unacceptable and say they'll take to the streets. Hundreds of thousands of Egyptians have been taking to the streets for over a week to protest against the draft constitution and a decree issued by President Mohammed Morsi. Morsi made a public speech late Thursday (06.12.2012), but his concessions were far less than demands made by demonstrators. Shortly after his televised speech, shouts of "get out, get out!" and "murderer, murderer!" could be heard. Similar calls were made before former Egyptian leader Hosni Mubarak was driven from power. Morsi said the brutal attack on the protesters on Wednesday was the result of a "conspiracy" designed by foreign powers and violent members of the opposition. It was an argument that Mubarak and the military council that took power immediately after Mubarak's ouster had used to account for violence against civilians. Statements from witnesses as well as video footage and other indicators, however, left little doubt that the Muslim Brotherhood began the attack. In the escalation that followed, both sides resorted to more violent measures. Invitation to dialogue Morsi warned demonstrators that even peaceful protests would only be allowed if they did not harm business, hinder traffic or endanger property. The president said he intended to take a stiff line against any breaches of those guidelines. For demonstrator Karim El-Beheiry, the situation was clear: "We have to end his presidency. If we don't stop the regime, we will all die. He wants to turn Egypt into a new Iran." Karim El-Beheiry is finished giving Morsi chances to dialogue In his speech, Morsi invited all political parties to a dialogue in the Presidential Palace. He said he intends to hold fast to a planned referendum on the new constitution on December 15 as scheduled. He added that he does not plant to annul decree he made to put his decisions beyond the prevue of the judiciary. In his speech, Morsi demonstrated willingness to discuss one of the decree's highly criticized article that gave him "power to take any necessary measures to protect the revolution, the unity and national security of the country." Opposition members said in recent days that they were only willing to start a negotiations with Morsi after he repeal the entire presidential decree. For El-Beheiry, after the violence on Wednesday, even greater concessions on Morsi's part would not suffice: "Before all this happened, we could say 'you can come back,' but now we do not have any choice. We do not have a reason for him to stay." Resignations put pressure on Morsi Morsi's offer to meet the opposition could be seen as a stalling tactic. If the situation escalates further even the constitutional referendum, planned for next week, could be in danger. Numerous political parties and other groups have already called for mass demonstrations for Friday. Additional pressure is coming from former presidential candidate Abdel Moneim Abul Fotuh, who said he holds the president responsible for the escalation of violence and has demanded Morsi retract the decree. The reaction of the National Salvation Front's Mohamed El-Baradei will play a decisive role. But press conferences alone will not bring about change, said protester El-Beheiry. Although he said he thinks El-Baradei is a good person, he also thinks the former diplomat should be with the people on the streets. "If someone wants to stay in the office and make an appearance on television, fine. But then don't say that you're speaking for the revolution," El-Beheiry said. Pressure on Morsi is also increasing from within his own ranks. The past days have seen a wave of resignations from top government positions, including Rafiq Habib, deputy head of the Muslim Brotherhood's Freedom and Justice Party. Habib is Christian and was an important Morsi supporter. Several Morsi advisers have also turned in their resignation, including the president of the state broadcaster, Essam El-Amir. Morsi could suffer his worst setback yet should dialogue with the opposition. Vice President and Justice Minister Ahmed Mekki is said to be considering handing in his resignation if an agreement cannot be reached.


Non-aligned summit kicks off amid controversy Egypt's Mohamed Morsi has opened the summit of non-aligned countries in Tehran and embarrassed his hosts. Making the first visit by an Egyptian leader in three decades, he spoke out against Iran’s position on Syria. Mohamad Morsi compared the conflict in Syria to recent developments in his own country. "The revolution in Egypt is the cornerstone for the Arab Spring, which started days after Tunisia and then it was followed by Libya and Yemen and now the revolution in Syria against its oppressive regime," he said. In stating this, he contradicted the position of the Syrian regime and its closest ally, Iran, that the Syrian uprising was a "terrorist" plot masterminded by the United States and other countries. The Syrian delegation walked out as Morsi delivered his comments. Earlier on Thursday Mohamed Morsi had received a red carpet welcome for his visit, which Iran had billed as a breakthrough in relations. Diplomatic ties between Cairo and Tehran were cut off in 1979 following the revolution in Iran, because Cairo had supported the Shah and had just signed a peace agreement with Israel. Morsi handed over the rotating presidency of the Non-Aligned movement (NAM) to Iran at the beginning of the two-day Tehran summit. NAM was founded at the time of the Cold War in 1961 as a grouping independent of the then-rival Western and Soviet blocs. It has 120 members, mainly in Asia, Africa and Latin America. UN chief criticises Iran United Nations Secretary General Ban Ki-moon, who is also attending the summit in Tehran, reprimanded Iran for its stance on Israel. He said that comments made repeatedly by Iran's President Mahmoud Ahmedinejad denying the Holocaust and Israel's right to exist were “outrageous”. "I strongly reject any threat by any (UN) member state to destroy another, or outrageous comments to deny historical facts such as the Holocaust," Ban said in a speech to NAM participants. "Claiming another UN member state does not have the right to exist or describe it in racist terms is not only utterly wrong but undermines the very principles we have all promised to uphold," he added. Iran had hoped the summit would help to show that it has not been isolated as a result of criticism by the United States and other countries for its nuclear policy. The International Atomic Energy Agency has just launched a new Iran "task force" to scrutinise Tehran's nuclear programme and its compliance with UN resolutions. Iran is suspected to be conducting expanded enrichment for military purposes. The controversy on Syria, and Iran's nuclear ambitions are now overshadowing the meeting, which is being attended by 29 heads of state or government, including those of Afghanistan, India, Iraq, Lebanon, Pakistan and the Palestinian Authority. rg/ipj (dpa, Reuters, AFP)


Egypt proves reliable mediator in Gaza crisis After eight days of war between Israel and Hamas, the guns have gone silent. Egyptian President Mohammed Morsi played a key role in brokering the cease-fire, but at home criticism builds over a controversial decree. In his first foreign policy test as president of Egypt, Morsi demonstrated steadiness and continuity as a mediator between Israel and Hamas, reassuring the United States that Cairo would not take a radical new course in the post-Mubarak era. US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton was full of praise for the Egyptian president, whose compatriots in the Muslim Brotherhood are traditionally close to the Islamist group Hamas. "Egypt's new government is assuming the responsibility and leadership that has long made this country a cornerstone of regional stability and peace," Clinton said. Even Israeli Foreign Minister Avigdor Lieberman, a hardliner and not exactly a friend to Cairo, thanked President Morsi for his efforts in brokering the cease-fire agreement. Navigating the Israeli-Palestinian minefield Morsi's crisis management was a balancing act between foreign and domestic interests. The United States, Egypt's most important donor, expected Morsi to exercise a moderating influence on the leadership of Hamas. But the president's own followers in Egypt pushed for him to demonstrate solidarity with the Palestinians in the Gaza Strip. Egyptian PM Kandil (left) demonstrated solidarity with the Palestinians The Muslim Brotherhood had for years criticized deposed president Hosni Mubarak for pursuing an Israel-friendly foreign policy course. During the 2008 Gaza War, Mubarak largely looked on as the Israeli military launched a bloody ground offensive against Hamas. During the latest round of violence, Morsi withdrew Egypt's ambassador from Israel after airstrikes began against targets in the Gaza Strip. "The Israelis have to understand that this aggression will not be accepted," the Egyptian president said on state television. Shortly thereafter, Morsi dispatched his prime minister, Hisham Kandil, to the Gaza Strop in a show of solidarity with the Palestinians. But at the same time, the president used Egypt's influence on Hamas to successfully push for a cease-fire with Israel. Continuity in post-Mubarak Egypt When Morsi assumed the presidency last June, there was concern in Washington and Tel Aviv that the Islamist politician would pursue a more radical foreign policy compared to Mubarak. After all, the Egyptian Muslim Brotherhood and Hamas are ideologically kindred spirits in many ways. "But the Egyptian government expended a lot of effort trying not to fulfill these expectations," Henner Fürtig, a Mideast expert with the GIGA-Institute, told DW. "The government wanted show that it acted independently and did not view itself as a direct and immediate comrade-in-arms of Hamas." According to Egyptian political scientist Hoda Salah, Morsi is a pragmatist who is interested above all in preserving his own power. Salah believes that there has been no real change in Egyptian policy toward Israel since the fall of Mubarak. Cairo's diplomatic balacing act helped end the violence in the Gaza Strip "When Morsi was in the opposition, it was easy for him to criticize the Israelis and Egyptian foreign policy," the political scientist said. "But now he is president and he knows that he cannot afford to represent Israel as the enemy." Domestically, Morsi is working to expand his power. A decree issued Thursday severely limits the power of the judiciary, whose highest courts still consist of Mubarak-era judges.  Called a move to "protect the revolution," the decree said all decisions made by Morsi until a new parliament is elected were not subject to legal challenge. It also prohibited judges from challenging the Islamist-dominated group writing Egypt's new constitution.  Politician Mohamed ElBaradei wrote on Twitter that Morsi "usurped all state powers and appointed himself Egypt's new pharaoh." Further negotiations After eight days of fighting that killed around 170 people, the Egyptian mediators could not move the two sides to negotiate a long-term truce and convince the Israelis to open the borders of the Palestinian territories. It is a tough challenge. Israel wants an end to weapons smuggling into the Gaza Strip, and Hamas expects the Israeli blockade of Gaza - in effect since 2007 - to be completely lifted. But according to Salah, President Morsi doesn't have a long-term plan to solve the impasse between the Israelis and the Palestinians. "In the end, it's the old policy," the Egyptian political scientist said. And she believes the next war is just a matter of time.


Clashes in Egypt continue as protesters vent disillusionment Many in Egypt are dissatisfied with the military transitional government, accusing it of Mubarak-era tactics in suppressing dissent. The most recent clashes in Cairo are evidence that the revolution may not be over. Hundreds of protesters remained camped out in Tahrir Square in central Cairo on Sunday after a night of violent clashes with supporters of the ruling military transitional government. Health ministry officials said 231 people were injured when police fired tear gas and protesters loyal to the Supreme Council of the Armed Forces (SCAF) hurled stones at their rivals during clashes in the Abassaya neighborhood. Many from the anti-regime group then joined others at Tahrir Square, the center of the mass movement that ousted President Hosni Mubarak in February. Meanwhile a man was killed and four were wounded on Sunday when police and soldiers exchanged fire with men attacking a police station in the port of Ismailia. At least 50 people reportedly attacked the police station with the goal of freeing a prisoner arrested on theft charges. Leaders in the military government have accused the protesters in Tahrir Square of sowing instability in Egypt at a time when it is struggling to transition into a more free and democratic society. 'Wedge between the people and the army' Field Marshal Hussein Tantawi, head of the SCAF and former defense minister under Mubarak, said in a television address on Saturday that the council would work toward a free system through democratic elections and a new constitution.  Military leader Tantawi has promised democratic reform But the military leaders accused the pro-democracy group the April 6 Youth Movement of "driving a wedge between the people and the army." The April 6 movement, formed over Facebook in solidarity with a planned workers' strike in 2008, released a statement denying the military council's accusations. "We used to think that the revolution changed matters for the better, but we were filled with sadness after this statement was issued," it said. The military has come under increasing pressure from Egyptians disillusioned with the results of the anti-Mubarak revolution. The government is accused of rights abuses and using Mubarak-style tactics to quash dissent. Since July 8, a number of protesters have been camping out in Tahrir Square, demanding that former regime officials be brought to trial, military trials of civilians come to an end and Mubarak officials be ousted from senior government posts. Author: Andrew Bowen (AFP, dpa) Editor: Ben Knight


World leaders welcome Mubarak's resignation World leaders have welcomed the decision of embattled Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak to step down after three decades of power. The European Union said it was ready to help the Egyptian people "in any way it can." World leaders on Friday welcomed Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak's decision to step down after 18 days of nationwide protests, saying they hoped to see a swift transition of power in the country. UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon commended in particular the youth of Egypt for exercising their "legitimate" right to protest. "The voice of the Egyptian people has been heard," Ban said, renewing his call for a "transparent, peaceful and orderly" transition in Egypt - the extent and pace of which, he said, was up to the Egyptian people. In a televised speech, US President Barack Obama praised the grass-roots protest movement in Egypt, comparing the changes there to the fall of the Berlin Wall. He stressed that it was "the moral force of non-violence, not terrorism ... that bent the arc of history toward justice once more." Mubarak opponents celebrated in Cairo with fireworks "I am confident that the ingenuity and entrepreneurial spirit that the young people of Egypt have shown in recent days can be harnessed to create opportunity ... that will allow the extraordinary potential of the generation to take flight," he said, pledging that the US was ready to help Egypt in building a democracy. Praise from Europe Meanwhile, European Union chief diplomat Catherine Ashton said Mubarak had "listened to the voices of the people." Ashton praised Mubarak's decision, saying he had "opened the way to faster and deeper reforms" in Egypt. "It is important now that the dialogue is accelerated leading to a broad-based government which will respect the aspirations of, and deliver stability for, the Egyptian people," Ashton added. "The future of Egypt rightly remains in the hands of the Egyptian people … The EU stands ready to help in any way it can," the statement continued. German Chancellor Angela Merkel also welcomed Mubarak's decision as an "historic change." "I call on those who now bear the responsibility and will bear the responsibility to make the developments in Egypt irreversible," she told reporters in Berlin, where hundreds of Egyptians gathered to celebrate in front of the city's Brandenburg Gate. "I rejoice with the people in Egypt," the German chancellor said. Germany's second-in-charge, Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle, said ahead of his Saturday visit with Tunisia's interim authorities that Germany was "glad that the way has been cleared for a new political beginning."  Egypt's opposition celebrated its success in ousting the man many called a dictator  French President Nicolas Sarkozy meanwhile called Mubarak's step down a "courageous and necessary" move. In a statement, Sarkozy urged Egypt to hold free elections, saying, "France ardently hopes the new Egyptian authorities will take steps that lead to the establishment of democratic institutions through free and transparent elections." Poland's foreign ministry reacted to the news Friday, saying in a statement that a "truly democratic Egypt, open to cooperating with the world, living in peace and harmony with all its neighbors has a chance to contribute to strengthening the stabilisation of the region, including reaching a hoped-for breakthrough in the Middle East peace process." The Swiss government announced meanwhile it would freeze any of Mubarak's assets if found to be stashed in Switzerland. Last month, Switzerland slapped a similar freeze on assets of Tunisia's ex-President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali after his ouster. Reactions in the Middle East In the Middle East, Israel expressed concern that Mubarak's resignation could change its current peaceful ties with Egypt. "It's too early to foresee how (the resignation) will affect things," a senior Israeli official said, adding, "We hope that the change to democracy in Egypt will happen without violence and that the peace accord will remain." Meanwhile Iran's government proclaimed Mubarak's ouster a "great victory," as the country celebrated the 32nd anniversary of its Islamic Revolution. "The conquest by the will of the great Egyptian nation over the resistance and persistence of officials who were dependent on the world powers is a great victory," foreign ministry spokesman Ramin Mehmanparast told Iran's Arabic-language Al-Alam television.  Egyptian anti-government protesters react minutes after the announcement of Mubarak's resignation  Witnesses say residents poured into the streets in celebration in Egypt, Tunisia and Yemen, where thousands of government opposition protesters cheered at the news in the capital Sanaa. "Yesterday Tunisia, today Egypt, and tomorrow Yemenis will break their chains," some demonstrators chanted. Stocks go up, oil prices down Mubarak's deputy, Egyptian Vice President Omar Suleiman, announced Friday that Mubarak would step down, leaving power to the Higher Military Council, led by Egypt's Defense Minister Mohamed Hussein Tantawi. European stock markets swiftly bounced Friday upon news of Mubarak's resignation, with Germany's DAX closing at a three-year high. Meanwhile, world oil prices slid worldwide due to buyers' receding concerns that crude supply through the Suez Canal could be blocked. Author: David Levitz (AFP, AP, Reuters) Editor: Susan Houlton


Egypt's President Morsi attends summit in Iran Egypt's Mohamed Morsi is in Iran for the first visit by an Egyptian leader in over 30 years. He opened a summit of non-aligned countries at which Iran is seeking more international support. Mohamed Morsi received a red carpet welcome for his visit which has been described as a breakthrough in relations. Diplomatic ties between Cairo and Tehran were cut off in 1979 following the revolution in Iran. The fall-out had two reasons. Egypt had supported the Shah, Iran's leader, who had just been overthrown. Tehran also objected to a Israeli-Egyptian peace-agreement which had just been signed by Cairo. President Morsi was due to stay in Tehran only for a few hours. But he has indicated that he is aiming for a shift in foreign policy from that of his predecessor, Hosni Mubarak, who was ousted in Egypt's popular uprising last year. Morsi's spokesman Yasser Ali said that Egypt wanted to develop more "balanced foreign relations" and to build closer ties with China, Iran, African and Gulf nations Iran assumes NAM presidency Morsi hands over the rotating presidency of the Non-Aligned movement (NAM) to Iran at the Tehran summit, which was spread over two days. Iran sees its tenure of the movement as a means to show that it has not been isolated as a result of criticism by the United States and other countries for its nuclear policy. United Nations Secretary General Ban Ki-moon is attending the summit in Tehran as an observer, a fact that has been criticized strongly by the United States and Israel. NAM was founded at the time of the Cold War in 1961 as a grouping independent of the then-rival Western and Soviet blocs. It has 120 members, mainly in Asia, Africa and Latin America. Debate on the situation in Syria is expected to dominate the summit agenda. rg/ipj (dpa, Reuters, AFP)


Coptic monks remain outside a changing Egypt The Egyptian desert Natrun valley oasis is home to several Coptic Christian monasteries. The monks living there have remained largely unaffected by the political upheavals of the Arab Spring. A young monk living in al-Baramus, the oldest of all Coptic Christian monasteries, does not want his name mentioned, but is prepared to talk about his life. "I only leave the monastery very, very rarely. In 12 years, I have only been outside three times. I chose this life myself and that is why I do not feel like it has impaired my freedom," he says. It would appear that a monk's life in the desert has not lost any of its appeal. Several hundred monks live at the Natrun valley monastery in self-imposed austerity and abstinence. "Every one of us has a different reason. I had a very comfortable life. I studied business and had a good job. Thank goodness I had a successful life. But even so, I chose to leave the world behind me and enter a monastery. I wanted more time for prayer and contemplation," said the young monk. The devout still gather at Cairo's Al-Muallaga church Dwindling solidarity Life in a monastery is shaped by rituals and customs. The monks have not been affected by the monumental changes that have swept across Egyptian society. "We are not involved in politics, but from time to time people from outside stop by with news. We do have our opinion, like anybody else. I think the country is becoming more Islamic. There are more freedoms, but not for Christians. In Cairo, there have been many arson attacks on churches," he says. In January 2011, during the early days of the protests against President Hosni Mubarak, Copts and Moslems stood side by side. They were united in their resistance against a despot and their common struggle was successful. But since then, the solidarity has dissipated. The political and social upheaval has brought the people new freedoms. Among them, however, is the freedom to discriminate against religious minorities without fear of punishment. In particular, the Copts have borne the brunt of these actions. Religious freedom?  The growing number of attacks against Copts has led to protests In the course of the last few months, several churches have been set on fire across Egypt and dozens of Christians murdered. The violent attacks flare up especially when Christians protest against restrictions on their religious freedom. This discrimination has a long tradition in Egypt. Even former president and Nobel peace laureate Anwar al-Sadat was an opponent of religious freedom for Christians. In 1981, he banished the Coptic Pope to Saint Pishoy, the most famous Coptic orthodox monastery, in the Natrun valley. Four years later, the leader of the Coptic Church was freed by Sadat's successor, Mubarak. Saint Pishoy is the second residence of the current Coptic Pope Shenouda III. Some 120 monks live in the monastery. One of them is Brother Joaquin. When Deutsche Welle met him he was sitting on a bed of wooden planks in a bare room no larger than five square meters (54 sq. ft.). There is nothing in this room that recalls the violent protests on streets of Egypt. "This is a monk's cell with two rooms built in the 9th century," explains Brother Joaquin. "This room is for meditation, prayer, learning, and for sleeping. In the other room, a monk can receive guests or other monks who are his friends," he says. While the people of Egypt brace themselves for fundamental change, a monk's life in a monastery remains mostly the same. "The system is the same for us every day," notes Brother Joaquin. "We pray for the people who live outside. We also have a spiritual obligation to pray for peace." And with an imploring expression he adds: "The security situation here is very good. God watches over us." Priests in Cairo's old town At Saint Barbara's Church in the old center of Cairo, a mass has just ended. The priest, Sarabamoni Zaki has returned to his luxuriously appointed office. Unlike his fellow believers in the desert monasteries he is very interested in the political events of Egypt. Zaki says that the situation of the Copts has changed noticeably since the revolution.  Pictures of the Holy Family fleeing to Egypt are a common Coptic motif  "Since January 25 (2011), some Christians are now afraid. We do not know what will happen. We are very aware that there has been a change in the relationship between Christians and Muslims." The Muslim segment of society is deeply involved in the power struggle. "We've never seen anything like this in the last 30 years," Zaki explains. Most Coptic Church leaders say they are grateful that the people were able to topple Mubarak. But at the same time they recognize that there were certain advantages to the old regime. "I would not say he was good or bad. But we did not have the insecurity that we have now," says Zaki. The priest is concerned about the future of Coptic Christians in Egypt, but he also sees no reason to hide. "I tell young people to persevere, to be strong. You must mix with the Muslims and live with them. Do not be afraid. Make them your friends and explain your concerns. But don't ever be angry or nervous. Be respectful and speak calmly." Such is the wishful thinking of a pious man. Author: Andreas Boueke /gb Editor: Rob Mudge


Egypt's Morsi starts talks on forming government Newly elected Egyptian president Mohammed Morsi has started consultations to form a government after he was declared the winner of the June 16-17 presidential election on Sunday. The new Egyptian president has moved into the office once occupied by ousted leader Hosni Mubarak and has started consultations on forming a new administration, according to a government spokesman. On Sunday, Morsi, of the Islamist Muslim Brotherhood, vowed to be "a president of all Egyptians" after he was declared the winner of the presidential runoff vote that again showed deep splits among voters in terms of secular and religious orientations. Egypt's election commission said Morsi won 51.7 percent of the vote, a margin of only 800,000 votes over Ahmed Shafiq, a former air force colonel who was perceived to be the favorite of the military council. It took over early last year when Mubarak was ousted during a public uprising seen as part of the so-called Arab Spring. At present, the Egyptian army is effectively in charge of the country. Morsi is not Egypt's commander-in-chief; he is not in control of the budget or the writing of a new constitution. There is no parliament to support or oppose his democratic mandate. Improving ties with Iran In an interview with Iran's Fars news agency, which was published on Monday, Morsi stressed that expanding diplomatic ties with Iran was high on his foreign policy agenda. He said closer bilateral relations would create "an effective strategic balance" in the region. Iran congratulated Morsi on Sunday, praising "the martyrs of the [Egyptian] revolution." Iran and Egypt have had no diplomatic ties since shortly after Iran's 1979 Islamic revolution because of Egypt's peace treaty with Israel, but the two governments cooperate on diplomatic affairs at a non-ambassador level. Morsi told Fars that "we will reconsider the Camp David Accord," referring the treaty between Israel and Egypt. West hopes for democratic course On Sunday, other international leaders also reacted to Morsi's election, with a clear message that democracy is the way to go in Egypt. Israel said it respected Morsi's victory and that it was ready to cooperate with any new administration based on the pioneering peace treaty between the two countries. EU foreign policy chief Catherine Ashton encouraged Morsi "to reach out to all other political and social groups." At a meeting of foreign ministers in Luxembourg on Monday, German Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle said that "it is about continuing the process of democratic transformation." He welcomed Morsi's pledge to be a president for all Egyptians. "That is very significant," he said. His UK counterpart William Hague also urged Egypt to follow "a transparent, democratic process." On Sunday, US President Barack Obama congratulated Morsi by telephone. The White House said that "the president underscored that the United States will continue to support Egypt's transition to democracy and stand by the Egyptian people as they fulfil the promise of their revolution." ng/ipj (AP, AFP, dpa, Reuters)


'Enough!' movement aims to bring change to Ethiopia The revolutions and protests across the Arab World have yet to to take hold in Africa. The opposition in Ethiopia wants to change that and is calling for mass anti-government demonstrations. In Ethiopia, May 28 is known as Victory Day - the day in 1991 when Meles Zenawi's rebel troops triumphantly entered Addis Ababa to take power from military dictator Mengistu. But 20 years after the revolution, the onetime rebel leader continues to cling to power - and now he is worried about facing an uprising of his own. 

Beka movement 
For months now, opposition groups have been organizing a protest movement against Meles, called "Beka!" - a word that means "Enough!" in Amharic. Many Ethiopians, it seems, have had "enough" of Meles' leadership - they are complaining about the soaring costs of living, rising joblessness among youth, and increasing harassment from the Meles government. 
"It is time at last to end 20 years of ongoing suffering under the dictatorial regime," said Demelash Likun, the head of the Ethiopian youth organization in Germany. His group is one of those responsible for organizing the planned Beka protests on May 28. 
Demelash says now is a good time to take political action, since there is more focus on African politics now than ever before. "We can't forget that, thanks to the Egyptian and Tunisian people, everyone has seen that it's still possible to aim for democracy in Africa, simply following the will of the people," he said. 

 

Jasmin revolution in Amharish 

 
Many Ethiopians agree with Demelash, including Ethiopians that live in the US and Europe. The Beka campaign and protests began outside of Ethiopia in mid-January, 2011, via social media, right after the Jasmine Revolution pushed Tunesian ex-President Ben Ali out of his country. Since then, the opposition and civic groups, including youth groups in the US and Europe, have been holding demonstrations. 
This raises the question of whether the demonstrations have any effect on the local population. According to Lulit Mesfin, the international coordinator of the Beka movement, the answer is "yes." 
Lulit Mesfin doesn't want to say too much about the actions that the Beka movement is planning; if the government finds out about it, it would stop them, she said. 
"People would be arrested, killed and tortured," Lulit said. Five years ago, she notes, some 200 opposition members were killed by security forces during the parliamentary elections. A majority of the leadership of the largest opposition party was thrown into prison for nearly two years. 

Meles regime - business as usual 
This time, too, the government reacted with a wave of arrests, most of which affected the Oromo ethnic group. The Oromo are Ethiopia's largest ethnic group and they are unhappy about being politically marginalized. But they only represent the tip of a mass-protest iceberg. 
Meles Zenawi has also arrested Oromo members of his own ruling coalition - a fact that shows how nervous he is, observers say. The opposition is also reporting that Internet cafes are being monitored, on the "three agents per cafe" principal. The aim: to put the brakes on any possible Facebook-mobilized campaigns and avert a Tunisia- or Egypt-style revolt. 
Ethiopia expert Ulrich Delius said he, too, is aware that the Ethiopian government is taking a harder line. Delius, who works for the German rights group Society for Threatened Peoples (GfbV), says that up to now 370 politicians have been arrested, whereabouts unknown. 
"We've also seen constant saber-rattling between Ethiopia and Eritrea. Meles Zenawi threatened to significantly raise defense spending," Delius said. "That leads to increasing tensions in the region - and that is really very worrisome." 

Eritrean trump card? 
Once again Meles Zenawi is playing the Eritrean trump card. In a move thought to be mostly aimed at diverting attention from his political woes, Zenawi has recently made announcements about Eritreans being found on the border with explosives and weapons. Moreover, Zenawi says, Eritrea is trying to turn Addis Ababa into a second Baghdad, with its frequent bombing attacks. 
The plan is to shift the focus of peoples' anger onto Eritrea may just fail this time, despite the fact that there are plenty of enraged citizens in Ethiopia, the second-most populous country in Africa. Because the security forces, whose leadership is mostly recruited from Meles' Tigray ethic group, are on the one hand still clearly behind the political leadership. 
On the other hand, Ethiopia's democracy movement, unlike in Egypt or in Libya, cannot count on the full support of the international community, observers say. In the West, Ethiopia's regime is well-liked and appreciated - especially as a bulwark against Islamic terrorists from Somalia. And so far African Union, which has its headquarters in Addis Ababa, has not openly called for more democracy in Ethiopia; Libya was a different question altogether. 
Autor: Mohammed Negash (jen)
Editor: Rob Mudge Beka movement 
For months now, opposition groups have been organizing a protest movement against Meles, called "Beka!" - a word that means "Enough!" in Amharic. Many Ethiopians, it seems, have had "enough" of Meles' leadership - they are complaining about the soaring costs of living, rising joblessness among youth, and increasing harassment from the Meles government. 
"It is time at last to end 20 years of ongoing suffering under the dictatorial regime," said Demelash Likun, the head of the Ethiopian youth organization in Germany. His group is one of those responsible for organizing the planned Beka protests on May 28. 
Demelash says now is a good time to take political action, since there is more focus on African politics now than ever before. "We can't forget that, thanks to the Egyptian and Tunisian people, everyone has seen that it's still possible to aim for democracy in Africa, simply following the will of the people," he said. 

 

Jasmin revolution in Amharish 

 
Many Ethiopians agree with Demelash, including Ethiopians that live in the US and Europe. The Beka campaign and protests began outside of Ethiopia in mid-January, 2011, via social media, right after the Jasmine Revolution pushed Tunesian ex-President Ben Ali out of his country. Since then, the opposition and civic groups, including youth groups in the US and Europe, have been holding demonstrations. 
This raises the question of whether the demonstrations have any effect on the local population. According to Lulit Mesfin, the international coordinator of the Beka movement, the answer is "yes." 
Lulit Mesfin doesn't want to say too much about the actions that the Beka movement is planning; if the government finds out about it, it would stop them, she said. 
"People would be arrested, killed and tortured," Lulit said. Five years ago, she notes, some 200 opposition members were killed by security forces during the parliamentary elections. A majority of the leadership of the largest opposition party was thrown into prison for nearly two years. 

Meles regime - business as usual 
This time, too, the government reacted with a wave of arrests, most of which affected the Oromo ethnic group. The Oromo are Ethiopia's largest ethnic group and they are unhappy about being politically marginalized. But they only represent the tip of a mass-protest iceberg. 
Meles Zenawi has also arrested Oromo members of his own ruling coalition - a fact that shows how nervous he is, observers say. The opposition is also reporting that Internet cafes are being monitored, on the "three agents per cafe" principal. The aim: to put the brakes on any possible Facebook-mobilized campaigns and avert a Tunisia- or Egypt-style revolt. 
Ethiopia expert Ulrich Delius said he, too, is aware that the Ethiopian government is taking a harder line. Delius, who works for the German rights group Society for Threatened Peoples (GfbV), says that up to now 370 politicians have been arrested, whereabouts unknown. 
"We've also seen constant saber-rattling between Ethiopia and Eritrea. Meles Zenawi threatened to significantly raise defense spending," Delius said. "That leads to increasing tensions in the region - and that is really very worrisome." 

Eritrean trump card? 
Once again Meles Zenawi is playing the Eritrean trump card. In a move thought to be mostly aimed at diverting attention from his political woes, Zenawi has recently made announcements about Eritreans being found on the border with explosives and weapons. Moreover, Zenawi says, Eritrea is trying to turn Addis Ababa into a second Baghdad, with its frequent bombing attacks. 
The plan is to shift the focus of peoples' anger onto Eritrea may just fail this time, despite the fact that there are plenty of enraged citizens in Ethiopia, the second-most populous country in Africa. Because the security forces, whose leadership is mostly recruited from Meles' Tigray ethic group, are on the one hand still clearly behind the political leadership. 
On the other hand, Ethiopia's democracy movement, unlike in Egypt or in Libya, cannot count on the full support of the international community, observers say. In the West, Ethiopia's regime is well-liked and appreciated - especially as a bulwark against Islamic terrorists from Somalia. And so far African Union, which has its headquarters in Addis Ababa, has not openly called for more democracy in Ethiopia; Libya was a different question altogether. 
Autor: Mohammed Negash (jen)
Editor: Rob Mudge For months now, opposition groups have been organizing a protest movement against Meles, called "Beka!" - a word that means "Enough!" in Amharic. Many Ethiopians, it seems, have had "enough" of Meles' leadership - they are complaining about the soaring costs of living, rising joblessness among youth, and increasing harassment from the Meles government. 
"It is time at last to end 20 years of ongoing suffering under the dictatorial regime," said Demelash Likun, the head of the Ethiopian youth organization in Germany. His group is one of those responsible for organizing the planned Beka protests on May 28. 
Demelash says now is a good time to take political action, since there is more focus on African politics now than ever before. "We can't forget that, thanks to the Egyptian and Tunisian people, everyone has seen that it's still possible to aim for democracy in Africa, simply following the will of the people," he said. 

 

Jasmin revolution in Amharish 

 
Many Ethiopians agree with Demelash, including Ethiopians that live in the US and Europe. The Beka campaign and protests began outside of Ethiopia in mid-January, 2011, via social media, right after the Jasmine Revolution pushed Tunesian ex-President Ben Ali out of his country. Since then, the opposition and civic groups, including youth groups in the US and Europe, have been holding demonstrations. 
This raises the question of whether the demonstrations have any effect on the local population. According to Lulit Mesfin, the international coordinator of the Beka movement, the answer is "yes." 
Lulit Mesfin doesn't want to say too much about the actions that the Beka movement is planning; if the government finds out about it, it would stop them, she said. 
"People would be arrested, killed and tortured," Lulit said. Five years ago, she notes, some 200 opposition members were killed by security forces during the parliamentary elections. A majority of the leadership of the largest opposition party was thrown into prison for nearly two years. 

Meles regime - business as usual 
This time, too, the government reacted with a wave of arrests, most of which affected the Oromo ethnic group. The Oromo are Ethiopia's largest ethnic group and they are unhappy about being politically marginalized. But they only represent the tip of a mass-protest iceberg. 
Meles Zenawi has also arrested Oromo members of his own ruling coalition - a fact that shows how nervous he is, observers say. The opposition is also reporting that Internet cafes are being monitored, on the "three agents per cafe" principal. The aim: to put the brakes on any possible Facebook-mobilized campaigns and avert a Tunisia- or Egypt-style revolt. 
Ethiopia expert Ulrich Delius said he, too, is aware that the Ethiopian government is taking a harder line. Delius, who works for the German rights group Society for Threatened Peoples (GfbV), says that up to now 370 politicians have been arrested, whereabouts unknown. 
"We've also seen constant saber-rattling between Ethiopia and Eritrea. Meles Zenawi threatened to significantly raise defense spending," Delius said. "That leads to increasing tensions in the region - and that is really very worrisome." 

Eritrean trump card? 
Once again Meles Zenawi is playing the Eritrean trump card. In a move thought to be mostly aimed at diverting attention from his political woes, Zenawi has recently made announcements about Eritreans being found on the border with explosives and weapons. Moreover, Zenawi says, Eritrea is trying to turn Addis Ababa into a second Baghdad, with its frequent bombing attacks. 
The plan is to shift the focus of peoples' anger onto Eritrea may just fail this time, despite the fact that there are plenty of enraged citizens in Ethiopia, the second-most populous country in Africa. Because the security forces, whose leadership is mostly recruited from Meles' Tigray ethic group, are on the one hand still clearly behind the political leadership. 
On the other hand, Ethiopia's democracy movement, unlike in Egypt or in Libya, cannot count on the full support of the international community, observers say. In the West, Ethiopia's regime is well-liked and appreciated - especially as a bulwark against Islamic terrorists from Somalia. And so far African Union, which has its headquarters in Addis Ababa, has not openly called for more democracy in Ethiopia; Libya was a different question altogether. 
Autor: Mohammed Negash (jen)
Editor: Rob Mudge "It is time at last to end 20 years of ongoing suffering under the dictatorial regime," said Demelash Likun, the head of the Ethiopian youth organization in Germany. His group is one of those responsible for organizing the planned Beka protests on May 28. 
Demelash says now is a good time to take political action, since there is more focus on African politics now than ever before. "We can't forget that, thanks to the Egyptian and Tunisian people, everyone has seen that it's still possible to aim for democracy in Africa, simply following the will of the people," he said. 

 

Jasmin revolution in Amharish 

 
Many Ethiopians agree with Demelash, including Ethiopians that live in the US and Europe. The Beka campaign and protests began outside of Ethiopia in mid-January, 2011, via social media, right after the Jasmine Revolution pushed Tunesian ex-President Ben Ali out of his country. Since then, the opposition and civic groups, including youth groups in the US and Europe, have been holding demonstrations. 
This raises the question of whether the demonstrations have any effect on the local population. According to Lulit Mesfin, the international coordinator of the Beka movement, the answer is "yes." 
Lulit Mesfin doesn't want to say too much about the actions that the Beka movement is planning; if the government finds out about it, it would stop them, she said. 
"People would be arrested, killed and tortured," Lulit said. Five years ago, she notes, some 200 opposition members were killed by security forces during the parliamentary elections. A majority of the leadership of the largest opposition party was thrown into prison for nearly two years. 

Meles regime - business as usual 
This time, too, the government reacted with a wave of arrests, most of which affected the Oromo ethnic group. The Oromo are Ethiopia's largest ethnic group and they are unhappy about being politically marginalized. But they only represent the tip of a mass-protest iceberg. 
Meles Zenawi has also arrested Oromo members of his own ruling coalition - a fact that shows how nervous he is, observers say. The opposition is also reporting that Internet cafes are being monitored, on the "three agents per cafe" principal. The aim: to put the brakes on any possible Facebook-mobilized campaigns and avert a Tunisia- or Egypt-style revolt. 
Ethiopia expert Ulrich Delius said he, too, is aware that the Ethiopian government is taking a harder line. Delius, who works for the German rights group Society for Threatened Peoples (GfbV), says that up to now 370 politicians have been arrested, whereabouts unknown. 
"We've also seen constant saber-rattling between Ethiopia and Eritrea. Meles Zenawi threatened to significantly raise defense spending," Delius said. "That leads to increasing tensions in the region - and that is really very worrisome." 

Eritrean trump card? 
Once again Meles Zenawi is playing the Eritrean trump card. In a move thought to be mostly aimed at diverting attention from his political woes, Zenawi has recently made announcements about Eritreans being found on the border with explosives and weapons. Moreover, Zenawi says, Eritrea is trying to turn Addis Ababa into a second Baghdad, with its frequent bombing attacks. 
The plan is to shift the focus of peoples' anger onto Eritrea may just fail this time, despite the fact that there are plenty of enraged citizens in Ethiopia, the second-most populous country in Africa. Because the security forces, whose leadership is mostly recruited from Meles' Tigray ethic group, are on the one hand still clearly behind the political leadership. 
On the other hand, Ethiopia's democracy movement, unlike in Egypt or in Libya, cannot count on the full support of the international community, observers say. In the West, Ethiopia's regime is well-liked and appreciated - especially as a bulwark against Islamic terrorists from Somalia. And so far African Union, which has its headquarters in Addis Ababa, has not openly called for more democracy in Ethiopia; Libya was a different question altogether. 
Autor: Mohammed Negash (jen)
Editor: Rob Mudge Demelash says now is a good time to take political action, since there is more focus on African politics now than ever before. "We can't forget that, thanks to the Egyptian and Tunisian people, everyone has seen that it's still possible to aim for democracy in Africa, simply following the will of the people," he said. 

 

Jasmin revolution in Amharish 

 
Many Ethiopians agree with Demelash, including Ethiopians that live in the US and Europe. The Beka campaign and protests began outside of Ethiopia in mid-January, 2011, via social media, right after the Jasmine Revolution pushed Tunesian ex-President Ben Ali out of his country. Since then, the opposition and civic groups, including youth groups in the US and Europe, have been holding demonstrations. 
This raises the question of whether the demonstrations have any effect on the local population. According to Lulit Mesfin, the international coordinator of the Beka movement, the answer is "yes." 
Lulit Mesfin doesn't want to say too much about the actions that the Beka movement is planning; if the government finds out about it, it would stop them, she said. 
"People would be arrested, killed and tortured," Lulit said. Five years ago, she notes, some 200 opposition members were killed by security forces during the parliamentary elections. A majority of the leadership of the largest opposition party was thrown into prison for nearly two years. 

Meles regime - business as usual 
This time, too, the government reacted with a wave of arrests, most of which affected the Oromo ethnic group. The Oromo are Ethiopia's largest ethnic group and they are unhappy about being politically marginalized. But they only represent the tip of a mass-protest iceberg. 
Meles Zenawi has also arrested Oromo members of his own ruling coalition - a fact that shows how nervous he is, observers say. The opposition is also reporting that Internet cafes are being monitored, on the "three agents per cafe" principal. The aim: to put the brakes on any possible Facebook-mobilized campaigns and avert a Tunisia- or Egypt-style revolt. 
Ethiopia expert Ulrich Delius said he, too, is aware that the Ethiopian government is taking a harder line. Delius, who works for the German rights group Society for Threatened Peoples (GfbV), says that up to now 370 politicians have been arrested, whereabouts unknown. 
"We've also seen constant saber-rattling between Ethiopia and Eritrea. Meles Zenawi threatened to significantly raise defense spending," Delius said. "That leads to increasing tensions in the region - and that is really very worrisome." 

Eritrean trump card? 
Once again Meles Zenawi is playing the Eritrean trump card. In a move thought to be mostly aimed at diverting attention from his political woes, Zenawi has recently made announcements about Eritreans being found on the border with explosives and weapons. Moreover, Zenawi says, Eritrea is trying to turn Addis Ababa into a second Baghdad, with its frequent bombing attacks. 
The plan is to shift the focus of peoples' anger onto Eritrea may just fail this time, despite the fact that there are plenty of enraged citizens in Ethiopia, the second-most populous country in Africa. Because the security forces, whose leadership is mostly recruited from Meles' Tigray ethic group, are on the one hand still clearly behind the political leadership. 
On the other hand, Ethiopia's democracy movement, unlike in Egypt or in Libya, cannot count on the full support of the international community, observers say. In the West, Ethiopia's regime is well-liked and appreciated - especially as a bulwark against Islamic terrorists from Somalia. And so far African Union, which has its headquarters in Addis Ababa, has not openly called for more democracy in Ethiopia; Libya was a different question altogether. 
Autor: Mohammed Negash (jen)
Editor: Rob Mudge Jasmin revolution in Amharish 

 
Many Ethiopians agree with Demelash, including Ethiopians that live in the US and Europe. The Beka campaign and protests began outside of Ethiopia in mid-January, 2011, via social media, right after the Jasmine Revolution pushed Tunesian ex-President Ben Ali out of his country. Since then, the opposition and civic groups, including youth groups in the US and Europe, have been holding demonstrations. 
This raises the question of whether the demonstrations have any effect on the local population. According to Lulit Mesfin, the international coordinator of the Beka movement, the answer is "yes." 
Lulit Mesfin doesn't want to say too much about the actions that the Beka movement is planning; if the government finds out about it, it would stop them, she said. 
"People would be arrested, killed and tortured," Lulit said. Five years ago, she notes, some 200 opposition members were killed by security forces during the parliamentary elections. A majority of the leadership of the largest opposition party was thrown into prison for nearly two years. 

Meles regime - business as usual 
This time, too, the government reacted with a wave of arrests, most of which affected the Oromo ethnic group. The Oromo are Ethiopia's largest ethnic group and they are unhappy about being politically marginalized. But they only represent the tip of a mass-protest iceberg. 
Meles Zenawi has also arrested Oromo members of his own ruling coalition - a fact that shows how nervous he is, observers say. The opposition is also reporting that Internet cafes are being monitored, on the "three agents per cafe" principal. The aim: to put the brakes on any possible Facebook-mobilized campaigns and avert a Tunisia- or Egypt-style revolt. 
Ethiopia expert Ulrich Delius said he, too, is aware that the Ethiopian government is taking a harder line. Delius, who works for the German rights group Society for Threatened Peoples (GfbV), says that up to now 370 politicians have been arrested, whereabouts unknown. 
"We've also seen constant saber-rattling between Ethiopia and Eritrea. Meles Zenawi threatened to significantly raise defense spending," Delius said. "That leads to increasing tensions in the region - and that is really very worrisome." 

Eritrean trump card? 
Once again Meles Zenawi is playing the Eritrean trump card. In a move thought to be mostly aimed at diverting attention from his political woes, Zenawi has recently made announcements about Eritreans being found on the border with explosives and weapons. Moreover, Zenawi says, Eritrea is trying to turn Addis Ababa into a second Baghdad, with its frequent bombing attacks. 
The plan is to shift the focus of peoples' anger onto Eritrea may just fail this time, despite the fact that there are plenty of enraged citizens in Ethiopia, the second-most populous country in Africa. Because the security forces, whose leadership is mostly recruited from Meles' Tigray ethic group, are on the one hand still clearly behind the political leadership. 
On the other hand, Ethiopia's democracy movement, unlike in Egypt or in Libya, cannot count on the full support of the international community, observers say. In the West, Ethiopia's regime is well-liked and appreciated - especially as a bulwark against Islamic terrorists from Somalia. And so far African Union, which has its headquarters in Addis Ababa, has not openly called for more democracy in Ethiopia; Libya was a different question altogether. 
Autor: Mohammed Negash (jen)
Editor: Rob Mudge Jasmin revolution in Amharish 

 
Many Ethiopians agree with Demelash, including Ethiopians that live in the US and Europe. The Beka campaign and protests began outside of Ethiopia in mid-January, 2011, via social media, right after the Jasmine Revolution pushed Tunesian ex-President Ben Ali out of his country. Since then, the opposition and civic groups, including youth groups in the US and Europe, have been holding demonstrations. 
This raises the question of whether the demonstrations have any effect on the local population. According to Lulit Mesfin, the international coordinator of the Beka movement, the answer is "yes." 
Lulit Mesfin doesn't want to say too much about the actions that the Beka movement is planning; if the government finds out about it, it would stop them, she said. 
"People would be arrested, killed and tortured," Lulit said. Five years ago, she notes, some 200 opposition members were killed by security forces during the parliamentary elections. A majority of the leadership of the largest opposition party was thrown into prison for nearly two years. 

Meles regime - business as usual 
This time, too, the government reacted with a wave of arrests, most of which affected the Oromo ethnic group. The Oromo are Ethiopia's largest ethnic group and they are unhappy about being politically marginalized. But they only represent the tip of a mass-protest iceberg. 
Meles Zenawi has also arrested Oromo members of his own ruling coalition - a fact that shows how nervous he is, observers say. The opposition is also reporting that Internet cafes are being monitored, on the "three agents per cafe" principal. The aim: to put the brakes on any possible Facebook-mobilized campaigns and avert a Tunisia- or Egypt-style revolt. 
Ethiopia expert Ulrich Delius said he, too, is aware that the Ethiopian government is taking a harder line. Delius, who works for the German rights group Society for Threatened Peoples (GfbV), says that up to now 370 politicians have been arrested, whereabouts unknown. 
"We've also seen constant saber-rattling between Ethiopia and Eritrea. Meles Zenawi threatened to significantly raise defense spending," Delius said. "That leads to increasing tensions in the region - and that is really very worrisome." 

Eritrean trump card? 
Once again Meles Zenawi is playing the Eritrean trump card. In a move thought to be mostly aimed at diverting attention from his political woes, Zenawi has recently made announcements about Eritreans being found on the border with explosives and weapons. Moreover, Zenawi says, Eritrea is trying to turn Addis Ababa into a second Baghdad, with its frequent bombing attacks. 
The plan is to shift the focus of peoples' anger onto Eritrea may just fail this time, despite the fact that there are plenty of enraged citizens in Ethiopia, the second-most populous country in Africa. Because the security forces, whose leadership is mostly recruited from Meles' Tigray ethic group, are on the one hand still clearly behind the political leadership. 
On the other hand, Ethiopia's democracy movement, unlike in Egypt or in Libya, cannot count on the full support of the international community, observers say. In the West, Ethiopia's regime is well-liked and appreciated - especially as a bulwark against Islamic terrorists from Somalia. And so far African Union, which has its headquarters in Addis Ababa, has not openly called for more democracy in Ethiopia; Libya was a different question altogether. 
Autor: Mohammed Negash (jen)
Editor: Rob Mudge Many Ethiopians agree with Demelash, including Ethiopians that live in the US and Europe. The Beka campaign and protests began outside of Ethiopia in mid-January, 2011, via social media, right after the Jasmine Revolution pushed Tunesian ex-President Ben Ali out of his country. Since then, the opposition and civic groups, including youth groups in the US and Europe, have been holding demonstrations. 
This raises the question of whether the demonstrations have any effect on the local population. According to Lulit Mesfin, the international coordinator of the Beka movement, the answer is "yes." 
Lulit Mesfin doesn't want to say too much about the actions that the Beka movement is planning; if the government finds out about it, it would stop them, she said. 
"People would be arrested, killed and tortured," Lulit said. Five years ago, she notes, some 200 opposition members were killed by security forces during the parliamentary elections. A majority of the leadership of the largest opposition party was thrown into prison for nearly two years. 

Meles regime - business as usual 
This time, too, the government reacted with a wave of arrests, most of which affected the Oromo ethnic group. The Oromo are Ethiopia's largest ethnic group and they are unhappy about being politically marginalized. But they only represent the tip of a mass-protest iceberg. 
Meles Zenawi has also arrested Oromo members of his own ruling coalition - a fact that shows how nervous he is, observers say. The opposition is also reporting that Internet cafes are being monitored, on the "three agents per cafe" principal. The aim: to put the brakes on any possible Facebook-mobilized campaigns and avert a Tunisia- or Egypt-style revolt. 
Ethiopia expert Ulrich Delius said he, too, is aware that the Ethiopian government is taking a harder line. Delius, who works for the German rights group Society for Threatened Peoples (GfbV), says that up to now 370 politicians have been arrested, whereabouts unknown. 
"We've also seen constant saber-rattling between Ethiopia and Eritrea. Meles Zenawi threatened to significantly raise defense spending," Delius said. "That leads to increasing tensions in the region - and that is really very worrisome." 

Eritrean trump card? 
Once again Meles Zenawi is playing the Eritrean trump card. In a move thought to be mostly aimed at diverting attention from his political woes, Zenawi has recently made announcements about Eritreans being found on the border with explosives and weapons. Moreover, Zenawi says, Eritrea is trying to turn Addis Ababa into a second Baghdad, with its frequent bombing attacks. 
The plan is to shift the focus of peoples' anger onto Eritrea may just fail this time, despite the fact that there are plenty of enraged citizens in Ethiopia, the second-most populous country in Africa. Because the security forces, whose leadership is mostly recruited from Meles' Tigray ethic group, are on the one hand still clearly behind the political leadership. 
On the other hand, Ethiopia's democracy movement, unlike in Egypt or in Libya, cannot count on the full support of the international community, observers say. In the West, Ethiopia's regime is well-liked and appreciated - especially as a bulwark against Islamic terrorists from Somalia. And so far African Union, which has its headquarters in Addis Ababa, has not openly called for more democracy in Ethiopia; Libya was a different question altogether. 
Autor: Mohammed Negash (jen)
Editor: Rob Mudge Many Ethiopians agree with Demelash, including Ethiopians that live in the US and Europe. The Beka campaign and protests began outside of Ethiopia in mid-January, 2011, via social media, right after the Jasmine Revolution pushed Tunesian ex-President Ben Ali out of his country. Since then, the opposition and civic groups, including youth groups in the US and Europe, have been holding demonstrations. 
This raises the question of whether the demonstrations have any effect on the local population. According to Lulit Mesfin, the international coordinator of the Beka movement, the answer is "yes." 
Lulit Mesfin doesn't want to say too much about the actions that the Beka movement is planning; if the government finds out about it, it would stop them, she said. 
"People would be arrested, killed and tortured," Lulit said. Five years ago, she notes, some 200 opposition members were killed by security forces during the parliamentary elections. A majority of the leadership of the largest opposition party was thrown into prison for nearly two years. 

Meles regime - business as usual 
This time, too, the government reacted with a wave of arrests, most of which affected the Oromo ethnic group. The Oromo are Ethiopia's largest ethnic group and they are unhappy about being politically marginalized. But they only represent the tip of a mass-protest iceberg. 
Meles Zenawi has also arrested Oromo members of his own ruling coalition - a fact that shows how nervous he is, observers say. The opposition is also reporting that Internet cafes are being monitored, on the "three agents per cafe" principal. The aim: to put the brakes on any possible Facebook-mobilized campaigns and avert a Tunisia- or Egypt-style revolt. 
Ethiopia expert Ulrich Delius said he, too, is aware that the Ethiopian government is taking a harder line. Delius, who works for the German rights group Society for Threatened Peoples (GfbV), says that up to now 370 politicians have been arrested, whereabouts unknown. 
"We've also seen constant saber-rattling between Ethiopia and Eritrea. Meles Zenawi threatened to significantly raise defense spending," Delius said. "That leads to increasing tensions in the region - and that is really very worrisome." 

Eritrean trump card? 
Once again Meles Zenawi is playing the Eritrean trump card. In a move thought to be mostly aimed at diverting attention from his political woes, Zenawi has recently made announcements about Eritreans being found on the border with explosives and weapons. Moreover, Zenawi says, Eritrea is trying to turn Addis Ababa into a second Baghdad, with its frequent bombing attacks. 
The plan is to shift the focus of peoples' anger onto Eritrea may just fail this time, despite the fact that there are plenty of enraged citizens in Ethiopia, the second-most populous country in Africa. Because the security forces, whose leadership is mostly recruited from Meles' Tigray ethic group, are on the one hand still clearly behind the political leadership. 
On the other hand, Ethiopia's democracy movement, unlike in Egypt or in Libya, cannot count on the full support of the international community, observers say. In the West, Ethiopia's regime is well-liked and appreciated - especially as a bulwark against Islamic terrorists from Somalia. And so far African Union, which has its headquarters in Addis Ababa, has not openly called for more democracy in Ethiopia; Libya was a different question altogether. 
Autor: Mohammed Negash (jen)
Editor: Rob Mudge This raises the question of whether the demonstrations have any effect on the local population. According to Lulit Mesfin, the international coordinator of the Beka movement, the answer is "yes." 
Lulit Mesfin doesn't want to say too much about the actions that the Beka movement is planning; if the government finds out about it, it would stop them, she said. 
"People would be arrested, killed and tortured," Lulit said. Five years ago, she notes, some 200 opposition members were killed by security forces during the parliamentary elections. A majority of the leadership of the largest opposition party was thrown into prison for nearly two years. 

Meles regime - business as usual 
This time, too, the government reacted with a wave of arrests, most of which affected the Oromo ethnic group. The Oromo are Ethiopia's largest ethnic group and they are unhappy about being politically marginalized. But they only represent the tip of a mass-protest iceberg. 
Meles Zenawi has also arrested Oromo members of his own ruling coalition - a fact that shows how nervous he is, observers say. The opposition is also reporting that Internet cafes are being monitored, on the "three agents per cafe" principal. The aim: to put the brakes on any possible Facebook-mobilized campaigns and avert a Tunisia- or Egypt-style revolt. 
Ethiopia expert Ulrich Delius said he, too, is aware that the Ethiopian government is taking a harder line. Delius, who works for the German rights group Society for Threatened Peoples (GfbV), says that up to now 370 politicians have been arrested, whereabouts unknown. 
"We've also seen constant saber-rattling between Ethiopia and Eritrea. Meles Zenawi threatened to significantly raise defense spending," Delius said. "That leads to increasing tensions in the region - and that is really very worrisome." 

Eritrean trump card? 
Once again Meles Zenawi is playing the Eritrean trump card. In a move thought to be mostly aimed at diverting attention from his political woes, Zenawi has recently made announcements about Eritreans being found on the border with explosives and weapons. Moreover, Zenawi says, Eritrea is trying to turn Addis Ababa into a second Baghdad, with its frequent bombing attacks. 
The plan is to shift the focus of peoples' anger onto Eritrea may just fail this time, despite the fact that there are plenty of enraged citizens in Ethiopia, the second-most populous country in Africa. Because the security forces, whose leadership is mostly recruited from Meles' Tigray ethic group, are on the one hand still clearly behind the political leadership. 
On the other hand, Ethiopia's democracy movement, unlike in Egypt or in Libya, cannot count on the full support of the international community, observers say. In the West, Ethiopia's regime is well-liked and appreciated - especially as a bulwark against Islamic terrorists from Somalia. And so far African Union, which has its headquarters in Addis Ababa, has not openly called for more democracy in Ethiopia; Libya was a different question altogether. 
Autor: Mohammed Negash (jen)
Editor: Rob Mudge Lulit Mesfin doesn't want to say too much about the actions that the Beka movement is planning; if the government finds out about it, it would stop them, she said. 
"People would be arrested, killed and tortured," Lulit said. Five years ago, she notes, some 200 opposition members were killed by security forces during the parliamentary elections. A majority of the leadership of the largest opposition party was thrown into prison for nearly two years. 

Meles regime - business as usual 
This time, too, the government reacted with a wave of arrests, most of which affected the Oromo ethnic group. The Oromo are Ethiopia's largest ethnic group and they are unhappy about being politically marginalized. But they only represent the tip of a mass-protest iceberg. 
Meles Zenawi has also arrested Oromo members of his own ruling coalition - a fact that shows how nervous he is, observers say. The opposition is also reporting that Internet cafes are being monitored, on the "three agents per cafe" principal. The aim: to put the brakes on any possible Facebook-mobilized campaigns and avert a Tunisia- or Egypt-style revolt. 
Ethiopia expert Ulrich Delius said he, too, is aware that the Ethiopian government is taking a harder line. Delius, who works for the German rights group Society for Threatened Peoples (GfbV), says that up to now 370 politicians have been arrested, whereabouts unknown. 
"We've also seen constant saber-rattling between Ethiopia and Eritrea. Meles Zenawi threatened to significantly raise defense spending," Delius said. "That leads to increasing tensions in the region - and that is really very worrisome." 

Eritrean trump card? 
Once again Meles Zenawi is playing the Eritrean trump card. In a move thought to be mostly aimed at diverting attention from his political woes, Zenawi has recently made announcements about Eritreans being found on the border with explosives and weapons. Moreover, Zenawi says, Eritrea is trying to turn Addis Ababa into a second Baghdad, with its frequent bombing attacks. 
The plan is to shift the focus of peoples' anger onto Eritrea may just fail this time, despite the fact that there are plenty of enraged citizens in Ethiopia, the second-most populous country in Africa. Because the security forces, whose leadership is mostly recruited from Meles' Tigray ethic group, are on the one hand still clearly behind the political leadership. 
On the other hand, Ethiopia's democracy movement, unlike in Egypt or in Libya, cannot count on the full support of the international community, observers say. In the West, Ethiopia's regime is well-liked and appreciated - especially as a bulwark against Islamic terrorists from Somalia. And so far African Union, which has its headquarters in Addis Ababa, has not openly called for more democracy in Ethiopia; Libya was a different question altogether. 
Autor: Mohammed Negash (jen)
Editor: Rob Mudge "People would be arrested, killed and tortured," Lulit said. Five years ago, she notes, some 200 opposition members were killed by security forces during the parliamentary elections. A majority of the leadership of the largest opposition party was thrown into prison for nearly two years. 

Meles regime - business as usual 
This time, too, the government reacted with a wave of arrests, most of which affected the Oromo ethnic group. The Oromo are Ethiopia's largest ethnic group and they are unhappy about being politically marginalized. But they only represent the tip of a mass-protest iceberg. 
Meles Zenawi has also arrested Oromo members of his own ruling coalition - a fact that shows how nervous he is, observers say. The opposition is also reporting that Internet cafes are being monitored, on the "three agents per cafe" principal. The aim: to put the brakes on any possible Facebook-mobilized campaigns and avert a Tunisia- or Egypt-style revolt. 
Ethiopia expert Ulrich Delius said he, too, is aware that the Ethiopian government is taking a harder line. Delius, who works for the German rights group Society for Threatened Peoples (GfbV), says that up to now 370 politicians have been arrested, whereabouts unknown. 
"We've also seen constant saber-rattling between Ethiopia and Eritrea. Meles Zenawi threatened to significantly raise defense spending," Delius said. "That leads to increasing tensions in the region - and that is really very worrisome." 

Eritrean trump card? 
Once again Meles Zenawi is playing the Eritrean trump card. In a move thought to be mostly aimed at diverting attention from his political woes, Zenawi has recently made announcements about Eritreans being found on the border with explosives and weapons. Moreover, Zenawi says, Eritrea is trying to turn Addis Ababa into a second Baghdad, with its frequent bombing attacks. 
The plan is to shift the focus of peoples' anger onto Eritrea may just fail this time, despite the fact that there are plenty of enraged citizens in Ethiopia, the second-most populous country in Africa. Because the security forces, whose leadership is mostly recruited from Meles' Tigray ethic group, are on the one hand still clearly behind the political leadership. 
On the other hand, Ethiopia's democracy movement, unlike in Egypt or in Libya, cannot count on the full support of the international community, observers say. In the West, Ethiopia's regime is well-liked and appreciated - especially as a bulwark against Islamic terrorists from Somalia. And so far African Union, which has its headquarters in Addis Ababa, has not openly called for more democracy in Ethiopia; Libya was a different question altogether. 
Autor: Mohammed Negash (jen)
Editor: Rob Mudge Meles regime - business as usual 
This time, too, the government reacted with a wave of arrests, most of which affected the Oromo ethnic group. The Oromo are Ethiopia's largest ethnic group and they are unhappy about being politically marginalized. But they only represent the tip of a mass-protest iceberg. 
Meles Zenawi has also arrested Oromo members of his own ruling coalition - a fact that shows how nervous he is, observers say. The opposition is also reporting that Internet cafes are being monitored, on the "three agents per cafe" principal. The aim: to put the brakes on any possible Facebook-mobilized campaigns and avert a Tunisia- or Egypt-style revolt. 
Ethiopia expert Ulrich Delius said he, too, is aware that the Ethiopian government is taking a harder line. Delius, who works for the German rights group Society for Threatened Peoples (GfbV), says that up to now 370 politicians have been arrested, whereabouts unknown. 
"We've also seen constant saber-rattling between Ethiopia and Eritrea. Meles Zenawi threatened to significantly raise defense spending," Delius said. "That leads to increasing tensions in the region - and that is really very worrisome." 

Eritrean trump card? 
Once again Meles Zenawi is playing the Eritrean trump card. In a move thought to be mostly aimed at diverting attention from his political woes, Zenawi has recently made announcements about Eritreans being found on the border with explosives and weapons. Moreover, Zenawi says, Eritrea is trying to turn Addis Ababa into a second Baghdad, with its frequent bombing attacks. 
The plan is to shift the focus of peoples' anger onto Eritrea may just fail this time, despite the fact that there are plenty of enraged citizens in Ethiopia, the second-most populous country in Africa. Because the security forces, whose leadership is mostly recruited from Meles' Tigray ethic group, are on the one hand still clearly behind the political leadership. 
On the other hand, Ethiopia's democracy movement, unlike in Egypt or in Libya, cannot count on the full support of the international community, observers say. In the West, Ethiopia's regime is well-liked and appreciated - especially as a bulwark against Islamic terrorists from Somalia. And so far African Union, which has its headquarters in Addis Ababa, has not openly called for more democracy in Ethiopia; Libya was a different question altogether. 
Autor: Mohammed Negash (jen)
Editor: Rob Mudge This time, too, the government reacted with a wave of arrests, most of which affected the Oromo ethnic group. The Oromo are Ethiopia's largest ethnic group and they are unhappy about being politically marginalized. But they only represent the tip of a mass-protest iceberg. 
Meles Zenawi has also arrested Oromo members of his own ruling coalition - a fact that shows how nervous he is, observers say. The opposition is also reporting that Internet cafes are being monitored, on the "three agents per cafe" principal. The aim: to put the brakes on any possible Facebook-mobilized campaigns and avert a Tunisia- or Egypt-style revolt. 
Ethiopia expert Ulrich Delius said he, too, is aware that the Ethiopian government is taking a harder line. Delius, who works for the German rights group Society for Threatened Peoples (GfbV), says that up to now 370 politicians have been arrested, whereabouts unknown. 
"We've also seen constant saber-rattling between Ethiopia and Eritrea. Meles Zenawi threatened to significantly raise defense spending," Delius said. "That leads to increasing tensions in the region - and that is really very worrisome." 

Eritrean trump card? 
Once again Meles Zenawi is playing the Eritrean trump card. In a move thought to be mostly aimed at diverting attention from his political woes, Zenawi has recently made announcements about Eritreans being found on the border with explosives and weapons. Moreover, Zenawi says, Eritrea is trying to turn Addis Ababa into a second Baghdad, with its frequent bombing attacks. 
The plan is to shift the focus of peoples' anger onto Eritrea may just fail this time, despite the fact that there are plenty of enraged citizens in Ethiopia, the second-most populous country in Africa. Because the security forces, whose leadership is mostly recruited from Meles' Tigray ethic group, are on the one hand still clearly behind the political leadership. 
On the other hand, Ethiopia's democracy movement, unlike in Egypt or in Libya, cannot count on the full support of the international community, observers say. In the West, Ethiopia's regime is well-liked and appreciated - especially as a bulwark against Islamic terrorists from Somalia. And so far African Union, which has its headquarters in Addis Ababa, has not openly called for more democracy in Ethiopia; Libya was a different question altogether. 
Autor: Mohammed Negash (jen)
Editor: Rob Mudge Meles Zenawi has also arrested Oromo members of his own ruling coalition - a fact that shows how nervous he is, observers say. The opposition is also reporting that Internet cafes are being monitored, on the "three agents per cafe" principal. The aim: to put the brakes on any possible Facebook-mobilized campaigns and avert a Tunisia- or Egypt-style revolt. 
Ethiopia expert Ulrich Delius said he, too, is aware that the Ethiopian government is taking a harder line. Delius, who works for the German rights group Society for Threatened Peoples (GfbV), says that up to now 370 politicians have been arrested, whereabouts unknown. 
"We've also seen constant saber-rattling between Ethiopia and Eritrea. Meles Zenawi threatened to significantly raise defense spending," Delius said. "That leads to increasing tensions in the region - and that is really very worrisome." 

Eritrean trump card? 
Once again Meles Zenawi is playing the Eritrean trump card. In a move thought to be mostly aimed at diverting attention from his political woes, Zenawi has recently made announcements about Eritreans being found on the border with explosives and weapons. Moreover, Zenawi says, Eritrea is trying to turn Addis Ababa into a second Baghdad, with its frequent bombing attacks. 
The plan is to shift the focus of peoples' anger onto Eritrea may just fail this time, despite the fact that there are plenty of enraged citizens in Ethiopia, the second-most populous country in Africa. Because the security forces, whose leadership is mostly recruited from Meles' Tigray ethic group, are on the one hand still clearly behind the political leadership. 
On the other hand, Ethiopia's democracy movement, unlike in Egypt or in Libya, cannot count on the full support of the international community, observers say. In the West, Ethiopia's regime is well-liked and appreciated - especially as a bulwark against Islamic terrorists from Somalia. And so far African Union, which has its headquarters in Addis Ababa, has not openly called for more democracy in Ethiopia; Libya was a different question altogether. 
Autor: Mohammed Negash (jen)
Editor: Rob Mudge Ethiopia expert Ulrich Delius said he, too, is aware that the Ethiopian government is taking a harder line. Delius, who works for the German rights group Society for Threatened Peoples (GfbV), says that up to now 370 politicians have been arrested, whereabouts unknown. 
"We've also seen constant saber-rattling between Ethiopia and Eritrea. Meles Zenawi threatened to significantly raise defense spending," Delius said. "That leads to increasing tensions in the region - and that is really very worrisome." 

Eritrean trump card? 
Once again Meles Zenawi is playing the Eritrean trump card. In a move thought to be mostly aimed at diverting attention from his political woes, Zenawi has recently made announcements about Eritreans being found on the border with explosives and weapons. Moreover, Zenawi says, Eritrea is trying to turn Addis Ababa into a second Baghdad, with its frequent bombing attacks. 
The plan is to shift the focus of peoples' anger onto Eritrea may just fail this time, despite the fact that there are plenty of enraged citizens in Ethiopia, the second-most populous country in Africa. Because the security forces, whose leadership is mostly recruited from Meles' Tigray ethic group, are on the one hand still clearly behind the political leadership. 
On the other hand, Ethiopia's democracy movement, unlike in Egypt or in Libya, cannot count on the full support of the international community, observers say. In the West, Ethiopia's regime is well-liked and appreciated - especially as a bulwark against Islamic terrorists from Somalia. And so far African Union, which has its headquarters in Addis Ababa, has not openly called for more democracy in Ethiopia; Libya was a different question altogether. 
Autor: Mohammed Negash (jen)
Editor: Rob Mudge "We've also seen constant saber-rattling between Ethiopia and Eritrea. Meles Zenawi threatened to significantly raise defense spending," Delius said. "That leads to increasing tensions in the region - and that is really very worrisome." 

Eritrean trump card? 
Once again Meles Zenawi is playing the Eritrean trump card. In a move thought to be mostly aimed at diverting attention from his political woes, Zenawi has recently made announcements about Eritreans being found on the border with explosives and weapons. Moreover, Zenawi says, Eritrea is trying to turn Addis Ababa into a second Baghdad, with its frequent bombing attacks. 
The plan is to shift the focus of peoples' anger onto Eritrea may just fail this time, despite the fact that there are plenty of enraged citizens in Ethiopia, the second-most populous country in Africa. Because the security forces, whose leadership is mostly recruited from Meles' Tigray ethic group, are on the one hand still clearly behind the political leadership. 
On the other hand, Ethiopia's democracy movement, unlike in Egypt or in Libya, cannot count on the full support of the international community, observers say. In the West, Ethiopia's regime is well-liked and appreciated - especially as a bulwark against Islamic terrorists from Somalia. And so far African Union, which has its headquarters in Addis Ababa, has not openly called for more democracy in Ethiopia; Libya was a different question altogether. 
Autor: Mohammed Negash (jen)
Editor: Rob Mudge Eritrean trump card? 
Once again Meles Zenawi is playing the Eritrean trump card. In a move thought to be mostly aimed at diverting attention from his political woes, Zenawi has recently made announcements about Eritreans being found on the border with explosives and weapons. Moreover, Zenawi says, Eritrea is trying to turn Addis Ababa into a second Baghdad, with its frequent bombing attacks. 
The plan is to shift the focus of peoples' anger onto Eritrea may just fail this time, despite the fact that there are plenty of enraged citizens in Ethiopia, the second-most populous country in Africa. Because the security forces, whose leadership is mostly recruited from Meles' Tigray ethic group, are on the one hand still clearly behind the political leadership. 
On the other hand, Ethiopia's democracy movement, unlike in Egypt or in Libya, cannot count on the full support of the international community, observers say. In the West, Ethiopia's regime is well-liked and appreciated - especially as a bulwark against Islamic terrorists from Somalia. And so far African Union, which has its headquarters in Addis Ababa, has not openly called for more democracy in Ethiopia; Libya was a different question altogether. 
Autor: Mohammed Negash (jen)
Editor: Rob Mudge Once again Meles Zenawi is playing the Eritrean trump card. In a move thought to be mostly aimed at diverting attention from his political woes, Zenawi has recently made announcements about Eritreans being found on the border with explosives and weapons. Moreover, Zenawi says, Eritrea is trying to turn Addis Ababa into a second Baghdad, with its frequent bombing attacks. 
The plan is to shift the focus of peoples' anger onto Eritrea may just fail this time, despite the fact that there are plenty of enraged citizens in Ethiopia, the second-most populous country in Africa. Because the security forces, whose leadership is mostly recruited from Meles' Tigray ethic group, are on the one hand still clearly behind the political leadership. 
On the other hand, Ethiopia's democracy movement, unlike in Egypt or in Libya, cannot count on the full support of the international community, observers say. In the West, Ethiopia's regime is well-liked and appreciated - especially as a bulwark against Islamic terrorists from Somalia. And so far African Union, which has its headquarters in Addis Ababa, has not openly called for more democracy in Ethiopia; Libya was a different question altogether. 
Autor: Mohammed Negash (jen)
Editor: Rob Mudge The plan is to shift the focus of peoples' anger onto Eritrea may just fail this time, despite the fact that there are plenty of enraged citizens in Ethiopia, the second-most populous country in Africa. Because the security forces, whose leadership is mostly recruited from Meles' Tigray ethic group, are on the one hand still clearly behind the political leadership. 
On the other hand, Ethiopia's democracy movement, unlike in Egypt or in Libya, cannot count on the full support of the international community, observers say. In the West, Ethiopia's regime is well-liked and appreciated - especially as a bulwark against Islamic terrorists from Somalia. And so far African Union, which has its headquarters in Addis Ababa, has not openly called for more democracy in Ethiopia; Libya was a different question altogether. 
Autor: Mohammed Negash (jen)
Editor: Rob Mudge On the other hand, Ethiopia's democracy movement, unlike in Egypt or in Libya, cannot count on the full support of the international community, observers say. In the West, Ethiopia's regime is well-liked and appreciated - especially as a bulwark against Islamic terrorists from Somalia. And so far African Union, which has its headquarters in Addis Ababa, has not openly called for more democracy in Ethiopia; Libya was a different question altogether. 
Autor: Mohammed Negash (jen)
Editor: Rob Mudge Autor: Mohammed Negash (jen)
Editor: Rob Mudge


Fully veiled and on air Maria TV in Egypt has been on air for a month. Women completely covered in veils go on camera to deliver tips on topics like marriage and beauty. The ultra-conservative broadcaster suggests a turn in Egyptian society. It's just her brown eyes that viewers see - no part of her body. Abeer Shahin is clothed from head-to-toe in a black garment. Gloves cover her hands, and a scarf known as a niqab conceals her face.  Abeer Shahin works day-to-day as a moderator at Maria TV, a broadcaster for, and by, deeply conservative Muslim women. Maria TV has been on air for a month, and its employees wear the niqab both on and off camera. Under Hosni Mubarak's rule, that would have been unthinkable. Abeer Shahin views Maria TV as proof that the revolution in Egypt was a success. Men are barred from appearing on Maria TV in any way "With Maria TV, we are fighting discrimination against fully veiled women," she said.  From beauty tips to faith  Maria TV aims to give conservative Muslim women more self-assurance by offering them advice with a solid basis in Islamic teachings. The broadcasts run for six hours daily, taking up topics like marriage, infidelity, raising children, managing a home and health and beauty.  Men are barred from the shows, including from calling in. When female experts go on air, they must wear a facial scarf or be pixelated on air. Maria TV's producers see the niqab as a religious duty.  "There is only one way for a Muslim woman to dress appropriately," said Abeer Shahin. "She must wear the niqab. That is written in Islamic law." Some Egyptian Muslims say the channel isn't conservative enough Shahin believes only by way of the veil is it possible for people to judge a person, not based on appearance, but on character. However, the majority of Egypt's Muslims reject the veil. And Al-Azhar University, the highest teaching authority on religious questions within Sunni Islam, went as far as to ban wearing the niqab. University members argue that there is no mention of the niqab in the Koran, or elsewhere in basic Islamic writings.  Liberal outrage  Maria TV targets just a small minority of Egyptians - some of whom say the broadcaster is not conservative enough. The women's voices could entice men, and, as such, should be voiced over with male voices, said one critic identified as Sheik Ibrahim.  However, many more Egyptians found Maria TV offensive for other reasons. Women's rights activist Sally Zohney initially opposed the channel, but she has come to see things differently.  "A lot of comments were like: This will encourage women to wear the veil or the full-face-cover. But at the same time as I'm asking for our rights to have very secular women, it's also their right to have their own representatives in the media,” Zohney said.  Maria TV is named after Maria, a Coptic slave from Egypt, whom the prophet Mohammed liberated and then took as a concubine. The station's founder Ahmed Abdalla, known in the Salafist scene as preacher Abu Islam, has refused to state where the station's funding comes from. He went on air in 2006 with Ummah TV, a missionary channel. Mubarak's security personnel regularly went to the studio and confiscated cameras and computers, eventually imprisoning Ahmed Abdallah. Activist Sally Zohney's opposition to the channel has relented Islamist power on the rise  Today Ahmed Abdallah is a free man. He and other conservatives sense their time has come. They command women on the streets to wear headscarves, or unmarried couples not to hold hands. In the port city of Suez, a Salafist recently murdered a young man because he was sitting with his fiancée in a park at night - alone. Before parliament was dissolved in February, Islamists had discussed whether women should be forbidden from applying for divorce and whether the age for marrying legally should be dropped from 18 to 12.  For years, Islam has gradually gained influence in Egyptian society. But Sally Zohney says the effects of that trend are just now being felt, due to the growing confidence of Islamists.  "It's a growing culture of headscarf and niqab, of teenage girls, of university students wearing the niqab, which I hadn't experienced when I was younger. It's just a trend that's come to the surface with the election of an Islamic president. It's making them feel more comfortable," Zohney said.  She and many other liberals are growing scared. Maria TV is a small and seemingly harmless change that reflects their concerns. But moderator Abeer Shahin is quite proud to be seen in television, even if she would be largely unidentifiable to her viewers on the street.


Quadriga - Egypt - Legitimizing the Coup Six months after the military coup which ousted Islamist President Mohammed Morsi, Egyptians have been called upon to vote yet again on a new constitution. The draft contains less Islam and more civil rights. But it also gives more power to the military. So will the new constitution bring more democracy, or does it cement the control of the military under General Abdel Fattah al-Sissi? Mohammed Morsi was democratically elected, but his government was authoritarian. The constitution introduced under Morsi was heavily criticized for edging Egypt towards theocracy and for giving wide-ranging powers to the president and his Muslim Brotherhood. By contrast, the amended constitution which has been put to a referendum puts considerable power in the hands of the military, as was the case during the thirty years of Hosni Mubarak's rule. The army will be able to name the defense minister, and the civilian authorities will have no power of veto over the generals' choice. The military budget and details of the army's involvement in many areas of the economy will remain exempt from democratic scrutiny. Under the new constitution, the Muslim Brotherhood and the Freedom and Justice Party with which it is closely linked would be further criminalised and kept out of the political process. The same would apply to the Salafist Al-Nour Party. All political organisations with a religious basis would be banned. The military has also taken a repressive line against anyone campaigning for a No vote in the referendum. The Muslim Brotherhood has called for people to boycott the vote. So is Egypt's new constitution a genuine chance to relaunch democracy in the country? Or is its only possible purpose to legitimize military rule? Tell us what you think: Egypt - Legitimizing the Coup quadriga@dw.de Our guests: Ahmed Badawi is a researcher and political analyst. He is the Co-Executive Director of Transform, a Berlin-based organisation specialising in conflict resolution and political development. He previously worked for the International Crisis Group, the German Institute for International and Security Affairs, Oxford Research Group and Zentrum Moderner Orient. In 1991-1999 he worked in Egypt as a print and TV journalist. He has a Doctorate in Political Science from Humboldt University in Berlin and an Master in Development Studies from the University of London. . Asiem El Difraoui studied politics and economics in Cairo, London and then Paris, where he received his Ph.D. He worked as editor in chief for IP Productions, a news agency focusing on the Middle East and the Arab world. He has written numerous prize-winning documentary films and news reports. He formed part of the Middle East and Africa research group at the German Institute for International and Security Affairs, focusing on jihadist propaganda on the internet. He is currently a Senior Fellow at the Institute for Media and Communication Policy in Berlin. His latest book deals with Egyptian society after the revolution. Tom Goeller - born 1958, he studied American History and Politics at the University of Bonn/ Germany. He has been a journalist for various media, among them BBC and ARD. From 1997 to 2004 he was a political analyst of international affairs with the German Weekly "Das Parlament" and the US correspondent in Washington, D.C. From November 2004 until end of 2010 he was the correspondent for Germany of the US daily “The Washington Times” and of the Egyptian monthly "Egypt Today". He now works as a freelance journalist and political analyst of US and Middle Eastern, as well as security affairs.


Egypt's new president denies seeking ties with Iran Egyptian President-Elect Mohammed Morsi has denied voicing interest in restoring ties with Iran during an interview with an Iranian news agency. The comments came as Morsi pushed ahead with efforts to form a government. A spokesman for the newly elected Islamist president told Egypt's official MENA news agency on Monday that a controversial interview with Iran's Fars news agency had never taken place. "Mr. Morsi did not give any interview to Fars and everything that this agency has published is without foundation," the spokesman said. The Iranian news agency published the apparent interview with Morsi on Monday, in which he said he was seeking to expand diplomatic ties with Iran. It reported that the president said an expansion of bilateral ties with Iran would create "an effective strategic balance" in the region and was high on his agenda. Such actions would be in direct opposition to western efforts to isolate Tehran over its disputed nuclear program. It is considered unlikely, however, that Morsi would carry out any major foreign policy reversals so early in his term. Fars said it spoke to Morsi just hours ahead of the announcement of Egypt's landmark presidential election result on Sunday, which saw him defeat former general Ahmed Shafik. The new leader, who is backed by the Islamist Muslim Brotherhood, is set to push ahead with efforts to form a government on Tuesday. Morsi victory welcomed Iran congratulated Morsi over his election win on Monday. According to Iranian state television, President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad said he emphasized "expanding bilateral ties and strengthening the friendship between the two nations." In Washington, meanwhile, US State Department spokeswoman Victoria Nuland said the United States looks forward to holding talks with Egypt's first democratically elected president. She said discussions would relate to Egypt's relationship with Iran and its "upholding of all of its international obligations, including obligations vis-à-vis Iran." Egyptian relations with Iran broke down in 1980 following Egypt's formal recognition of Israel and Iran's 1979 Islamic Revolution. ccp/ncy (AFP, AP, Reuters)


Film Festival kicks off with Marie Antoinette drama Berlin's 62nd Film Festival opened with a period drama set at the dawn of the French Revolution. It's just one of some 400 films which will be screened during the 10-day movie extravaganza. The Berlin International Film Festival - the Berlinale - has a reputation for being politically charged. At the same time, plenty of people in the German capital want to see the glitz and glamour that goes along with such a film event. At first glance, "Les adieux à la Reine" ("Farewell, My Queen"), the French motion picture to commence the film extravaganza Thursday night, would seem to have given film lovers just that. The film by director Benoit Jacquot centers around a major event in European history - the French Revolution - but, despite being a historical drama, has plenty of star allure. Queen Marie Antoinette is played by German actress Diane Kruger, who has long made her mark in the international movie business and in Hollywood. She was certainly the star attraction on the red carpet at the Berlinale Palast. Evening gowns and freezing temperatures Like many on Berlinale's opening night, she braved freezing conditions and walked the red carpet wearing a sleeveless dress. With temperatures dropping to six degrees below zero Celsius (21 degrees Fahrenheit), it must have taken some effort for the ladies of the film industry to stop and answer journalists' questions. But, for them, it may just be a day on the job in smiling for the camera and promoting their film. Traditionally, it is German celebrities who come to the Berlinale opening. Nina Hoss, Mario Adorf, Jurgen Vogel, Berbara Sukow and many others were there. Good-humored as ever, festival director Dieter Kosslick welcomed the stars and starlets of the local film scene. But, true to its international character, Kosslick was able to greet major international celebrities as well. "Dracula" star Christopher Lee attended, as did big-time British director and Berlinale jury president Mike Leigh. Charlotte Gainsbourg represented the female side of the jury. Hollywood celebrities like Angelina Jolie and Meryl Streep are expected in the coming days. Berlinale Film Festival red carpet. In typical charming manner, both Kosslick and TV host and comedienne Anke Engelke chatted throughout the opening gala, welcoming guests and listening in on the music performances. Each year, Berlinale tries to bring together show business and politics, glamour and commitment to social causes, and this time around, it's with a nod to the environment. Guests of honor arrived at the cinemas in hybrid-driven cars; the lights used for the red carpet came from energy-efficient light bulbs. At events over the coming days, little meat will be on offer at the buffet, announced Kosslick, a self-confessed amateur chef, who just a couple of years ago integrated the "Kulinarisches Kino" (Culinary Cinema) section into the film festival. All of these changes are matters close to the heart for Kosslick, who's been festival director for 12 years. Major social upheaval But on the festival's opening night, French guests Benoit Jacquot, actresses Lea Seydouxum, Virginie Ledoyen (who also play in "Farewell, My Queen") and of course Diane Kruger took center stage. In both of their speeches at the gala, German Culture Minister Bernard Neumann and Kosslick drew parallels between the French Revolution - the setting of Berlinale's opening film - and the recent Arab Spring uprisings. Art and film are always a measurement of social turmoil, Neuman said, referring to the situation of artists in China and Iran. Berlinale flies the flag for human rights and freedom of the arts. Which is a good thing, especially since the Year of Chinese Culture in Germany has just kicked off, Neumann noted. In China, artists are repressed and often thrown into jail, and that must be pointed out at festivals like the Berlinale, said Neumann. These were pointed statements.  The red carpet gets laid for the opening of the Berlinale Film Festival in Berlin. The opening film of the Berlinale, on the other hand, was not pointed in any way. "Les adieux à la Reine" is more of an intimate play than it is a political film, offering a private look behind the scenes of the court of Versailles, rather than a broad historical view of society. Told through the eyes of a royal servant to Marie Antoinette, the film focuses on the days surrounding July 14, 1789 - the storming of the Bastille. King and queen, court nobility and a couple of servants - three perspectives on one story are brought together by director Benoit Jacquot into a restrained historical drama. The camera stays close to the actors. Dialogue, glances and gestures dominate scenes. The rustling and swishing of the ladies' dresses and costumes impress themselves onto viewers more than the speeches and comments concerning this major political upheaval. This wasn't done purposefully or intentionally by the director. What does a revolution look like from the perspective of a bystander at the court? This was Jacquot's question and he made an interesting, low-key film about it. Yet it does not stir viewers' emotions, and it doesn't really offer deep insights into political intrigues or power struggles. Political film still to come In this respect, the parallels drawn by Kosslick and Neumann - which also recalled the overthrow of former Egyptian president Hosni Mubarek a year ago - may have been honorable, but also drew attention away from the fact that the Berlinale wasn't opened by a major, critical, political film. Political films work differently than that. Social upheaval and changes in society were supposed to be the theme of this year's Berlinale, but other films to be shown over the next few days will more likely fit that motto better than "Les adieux à la Reine." Many of the films in the other sections like "Forum" and "Panorama" - outside of the main "Competition," in which films vie for the Golden and Silver Bears - are committed to political and social causes. Films about the fate of child soldiers in Africa, the consequences of the recent Fukishima nuclear disaster, events in the Arab world and the war in Bosnia war – that's where politics will play a big role at Berlinale 2012. Author: Jochen Kürten / jw Editor: Louisa Schaefer


Egypt’s tourism industry fears for future Despite vows to revive tourism by new Egyptian president Mohamed Morsi, the country’s once-thriving tourism industry is worried his administration could impose strict Islamic laws, scaring off Western holidaymakers. Ekrami Latif, a diving instructor in the Red Sea tourist resort El Gouna, remembers well the moment when it became clear that Mohammed Morsi would be Egypt's new president. The streets of the resort remained largely quiet with just two cars driving by honking in celebration at the news, he said. The majority of the Red Sea resort's residents had voted for Mursi's rival Ahmed Shafik, a representative of the old regime. Mursi's victory has stirred fear amony some parts of the tourism sector Sitting at a café with friends in downtown El Gouna in the midday heat, Latif said Morsi's appointment had sparked fears in the area that tourists might stay away. "Of course I'm worried about my job," the 36-year-old said. "Tourists quickly move on to other countries where is the weather is just as good and the people are hospitable."  A bikini ban?   There's no lack of hospitality in El Gouna either. It's a place where tourists can surf, swim, dive or sail all day or relax in the many luxury restaurants with plentiful seafood buffets. But if Ekrami Latif and others like him in the tourism industry are to believed, those days could well be over. Concerns for the future of the lucrative tourism sector have mounted amid fears that the new Islamist leadership might impose strict Islamic laws that could scare off Western holidaymakers. The bulk of tourists to Egypt head to its famed Red Sea beaches in the last Egyptian parliament that was dissolved in June, several members of the Muslim Brotherhood debated a bikini - and alcohol ban. That could prove fatal for El Gouna and other tourist magnets on the Red Sea. Tourism is the third-largest sector of the Egyptian economy, responsible for every sixth job in the country. A drop in visitor numbers would be catastrophic for an economy severely battered by the turmoil that followed the ousting of President Hosni Mubarak last year. Investment to Egypt is drying up and foreign currency reserves have plummeted. Fears remain in the tourism sector that the new leadership may not tolerate the European tourist lifestyle, characterized by parties, alcohol and what some see as "indecent" clothing. Any ban would most certainly not be welcomed by Western tourists. Dutch national Annemarie Bakker has been to Egypt several times. Dressed in a skimpy top and shorts at lunch at an El Gouna restaurant, she said she enjoys a beer early in the day when she's on vacation. That's something she certainly can't imagine not doing. "If we're not allowed to wear a bikini or drink alcohol - no, then I won't be coming back," Bakker said.  Morsi vows to boost tourism   But for now, fears of the new government clamping down on skimpy swimwear and alcohol seem unfound. In his first address after becoming president, Mohamed Morsi promised that he would work to attract investment in all areas of the economy and do his best to revive tourism and to return it to the same robust shape it was in before the revolution. According to the Egyptian Tourism Ministry, the sector's revenues fell 30 percent in 2011 compared to the previous year. Unrest and street riots in Cairo have kept away visitors over the past year though most of the tourist magnets are far removed from the capital. Despite the country's world famous pharaonic ruins, it is beach tourism that makes up the vast proportion of Egypt's tourism activity. Adham Mahmoud is optimistic of things improving Adham Mahmoud, who's responsible for tourism in El Ghouna, however is optimistic. He said he believes President Morsi's words, pointing out that since he took office there haven't been any cancellations in the resort. Adham is well aware that Morsi faces much bigger challenges than pushing through Islamic dogmas. "Unemployment and poverty - those are points that are right on top of his list," Adham said. "He certainly can't allow a dispute with an industry that's doing well."  Fears remain   But Ekrami Latif, the diving instructor, isn't as upbeat. Morsi is part of the Muslim Brotherhood and an opportunist, he pointed out, who would change his political direction to match the current mood. If Morsi were put under pressure by the more radical Salafists, he could be pushed into passing tourist-unfriendly measures, he added. There's another worry on Latif's mind. He's a Christian just like around half the population of El Ghouna. Unlike other Egyptian towns, Christians and Muslims here work together closely. The small resort has both a church and mosque. During Ramadan, Christians work more while Muslims do their share during Christmas, he said. But that religious harmony could come to an end with Morsi, a Muslim Brotherhood politician, at the helm, Latif said.  "I think there could be many laws against Christians," Latif said. "And I think there will be much more divisions between Muslims and Christians. We don't know that but we're worried."  It's now up to the new Egyptian President Mohamed Morsi to honor his pledges and ease the fears of people like Ekram Latif and other Christians and workers in the tourism industry.  "We're hoping for the best," Ekrami Latif said. "Everyone deserves to lie on our beautiful beaches in a bikini and with a bottle of beer."  Author: Viktoria Kleber /sp Editor: Rob Mudge


Sakharov award goes to Arab Spring activists Europe is honoring the people whose struggles sparked the Arab Spring revolution. Five of them received this year's prestigious Sakharov Award. It's awarded annually by the European Parliament. The European Parliament was unanimous in its decision. Five people who played a key role in the revolutions witnessed in the Arab world are being honored for propagating freedom of expression. The award comes along with 50,000 euros ($65,000). Jerzy Buzek, president of the European Parliament, said the prize showed the admiration for those who had brought change to Europe's neighborhood. Tunisian trigger The revolution had its beginnings in Tunisia. In December 2010, 26-year-old Mohamed Bouazizi, a vegetable trader, was physically abused by police who had raided his stand and taken away his goods. He doused himself in petrol, went in front of the city hall and set himself on fire screaming, "enough of this poverty, enough of this joblessness!" Two weeks later he succumbed to his injuries. His act of self-immolation drove hundreds of thousands of Tunisians to the streets in protest. From there the whole Arab world faced an unprecedented wave of protests. The European Parliament awarded Bouazizi this year's Sakharov prize posthumously. Protests in Cairo's Tahrir square Cairo was next: On Jan.18, 2011 a young lady used a webcam to voice her displeasure with Egypt's ruling elite. She told her viewers, "I say no to corruption, I say no to this regime." Asmaa Mahfouz was only 26-years old when she uploaded the video to her Facebook account, urging people to come to Tahrir square to demand their rights. Thousands and thousands heeded her call to ask for freedom. Their grievances: social justice, basic liberties, democratic reforms. Today, Mahfouz has 14,000 friends on Facebook. The EU Parliament is also honoring Libyan dissident Ahmed al-Zubair Ahmed al-Sanusi. The 77-year old was Libya's most senior political prisoner, spending 31 years in prison under the Gadhafi regime. Much of his term was spent in solitary confinement. After 42 years of dictatorship, al-Sanusi is back again in Libya's politics courtesy of the governing rebels who ousted the government. Pencil protests In Syria, things have been different for the two activists named the other winners of this year's prize. Lawyer Razan Zaitouneh has been living in hiding for months. Her blog "Syrian Human Rights Information Link," has been reporting about the systematic abuse of human rights by the Syrian authorities. She has called for the transfer of President Bashar al-Assad to the International Criminal Court. The Syrian cartoonist Ali Farzat is in a similar position. As the protests gained momentum, his drawings became more direct. Even al-Assad himself was not spared by the artist's pencil. But that would be thoroughly punished. Foreign media showed pictures of a heavily battered and badly injured Farzat in hospital. The reason: a cartoon impression of President al-Assad as a hitchhiker, standing by the roadside with a bag in his hand and signalling with his thumb to Moammar Gadhafi to take him along. Just like Ali Farzat, other Arab Spring activists have had to sacrifice a great deal. Asmaa Mahfouz lost a friend during the protests. "I am not the only one who has earned this award," she told Deutsche Welle. The prize honors her as a brave woman. "But there other Egyptians more courageous than me," she added. "They too deserve to be commemorated, I am proud to be one of them and to live in this country." Author: Stefanie Duckstein / cm Editor: Daniel Pelz


Morsi's stance toward Israel, Iran still unclear An Iranian claim that just-elected Egyptian President Mohammed Morsi is planning to move his country closer to the theocracy in Tehran may have been a false alarm. But it showed just how jangly nerves are at the moment. Everyone with an interest in the Middle East was jolted by reports on Monday that newly elected Egyptian President Mohammed Morsi had told Iranian state radio he wanted closer ties to Iran and a revision of the 1979 Camp David Accords between Egypt and Israel. The situation then took on an almost surreal quality as Morsi immediately denied not only making the statements, but also having given an interview at all to Iran's FARS network. In the aftermath, even the experts are uncertain as to what, if indeed anything, really happened. "No one can say from here right now whether any sort of interview took place or not, but it's interesting that such a claim is coming from an official Iranian institution," Sylke Tempel, a Middle East expert at German Society for Foreign Policy (DGAP) told DW. "It's also interesting that Morsi was so quick to deny that he'd given the interview or that he'd said he wanted closer relations with Iran." Media in the West have tended to treat the interview as fictional. Still, the discussions surrounding it do give some real insight into how various parties - first and foremost Iran - may approach a democratic Egypt led by an Islamist president. Iranian pipe dream? Morsi was the Muslim Brotherhood's candidate Tempel points out that Iran Supreme Leader Ayatollah Khamanei was quick to welcome the popular uprising that began a year and a half ago and toppled the secular leader Hosni Mubarak. But she says the notion that the triumph of the Islamist Muslim Brotherhood will lead to a strong alliance between Sunni Egypt and Shiite Iran probably represents "wishful thinking." "We know that there is a gulf between Shiites and Sunnis and that many within the Muslim Brotherhood are sceptical toward Iran," Tempel explained. "It's not as if the Muslim Brothers are all fans of Iran. So it seems a bit strange that one of the first things Morsi would say is that he wants better relations with Iran." The story about Morsi's alleged statement got a lot of play in Russia, while being generally dismissed elsewhere outside of Iran. But it could also be seen as bit of internal Iranian propaganda. "The state-run media in Iran is exactly that: state run," Tempel says. "It's in the interest of the Iranian government to depict the revolutions in the Arab world as pro-Iranian. They want to pretend there's no divide between Sunnis and Shiites. They want regional hegemony, and a pro-Iranian Egypt would be perfect for that aim. So it's not surprising to find reports like this in the Iranian media." But regardless of its truth content, the Iranian report did create significant concern - a fact that reflects just how much of an open book Morsi is. Unwelcome distractions Demostrator at Cairo's Tahrir Square cheered when Morsi was declared the winner on June 24  Morsi's background as a leading member of the Muslim Brotherhood with its hostility to Zionism has made many countries, and particularly Israel, nervous. But Morsi resigned from that organization when he was elected, and experts say they don't expect any immediate drastic changes in Egypt's foreign policy. "I think we can take Morsi at his word when he says international treaties will be honored," Florian Kohstall, the director of the Free University of Berlin's Cairo office, told German broadcaster ARD. "The peace treaty with Israel will definitely be honored." Jane Kinninmont, senior research fellow on the Middle East and North Africa at British think tank Chatham House, shares that assessment. "I think it's overwhelmingly likely that no party that comes into power in Egypt is going to want to go back to a state of war," Kinninmont told AFP news agency, adding that Israel's main concern would likely be security in the Sinai area, a haven for both anti-Israel and anti-Egyptian-government militants. Tempel concurs with that view, but adds that the uncertainty Morsi represents has given Israelis another issue to think about in a situation already fraught with worries. "Israel's border with Egypt is about to become complicated, and it remains to be seen to what extent Morsi will insist upon the state's monopoly on force there," Tempel told DW. "For the Israelis, Iran is the paramount threat since their leaders have directly threatened to destroy Israel, and Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu is taking that threat seriously. Egypt represents an unwelcome further distraction." Up in the air Morsi's pledge to honor past agreements should apply to the 1979 peace treaty with Israel  For years, observers in the West worried about what would happen if an Islamist came to power in Egypt, where the government has usually been far more accepting of Israel than the general populace. Now that scenario has come to pass, even if Morsi has been speaking in relatively moderate tones and promising to uphold his country's previous agreements. Political Islamism is fact of life in democratic Egypt, and as Sylke Tempel points out, what long-term foreign policy ramifications it will bring simply cannot be foretold at the moment. "We've yet to see a clear foreign policy direction from Morsi," Tempel said. "But after all he's only been in office for a day and a half." And the circumstances under which Morsi came to power bring contraints that may push him in certain directions. "You have to remember that the Islamist parties got 70 percent of the vote in the parliamentary elections, but in the first round of the presidential ones, there was only 24 or 25 percent for Mohammed Morsi," German journalist and Middle East expert Esther Saoub told DW on the eve of Morsi taking power. "That means half of his votes came from people who didn't vote for him in the first round, and he has to keep these people," Saoub said. "If he disappoints them with overly conservative decisions, he will lose power." Author: Jefferson Chase Editor: Rob Mudge


Egypt: Election reporting In May Egyptians went to the polls to elect a new president. DW Akademie project manager Jens-Uwe Rahe describes a current project in Egypt focusing on balanced reporting. "Election reporting and political communication in North Africa 2012" is DW Akademie's most extensive project in Egypt since last year's revolution. What is involved? Our trainers and consultants are supporting partners in reporting on the elections. We're working with two private TV stations, an online news platform, a citizen journalists' network and the national journalists' association. We initially assessed the training needs of each partner. Journalistic skills such as interviewing techniques are on the list, as well as the planning of topics, editorial organization and a better understanding of their role as journalists. The goal is for Egyptian journalists to provide voters with balanced and relevant information on candidates, their campaigns, the rules and procedures relating to the election, and of course, the election results.   Why is this project so important? Project manager Jens-Uwe Rahe Egyptian journalists were for decades subject to censorship and practiced self-censorship themselves. As a result they have little experience in reporting freely and independently and this involves accountability and professional standards. Some of the media are overstepping the new freedoms and are mixing fact and opinion, and publishing rumors and claims without verification. At the same time the state is still trying to control the information flow, particularly when it comes to the state media. Reporters are being intimidated and have also been attacked. By making journalists aware of their social responsibilities as well as their rights, and by developing their skills we're aiming to boost their self-image and willingness to take advantage of the changes.   What are the results of the project so far? We're seeing immediate results with young presenters who now have a more professional approach. This is also true for the reporters and correspondents - they're starting to focus more on the story behind the news and are taking viewer perspectives into account. At the online media we’re training video journalists. Overall we're insisting that editorial planning go beyond a day-to-day approach and that feedback sessions take place regularly. This is now happening. We step back when it comes to political content because our partners don't want us to get involved with this aspect. We ourselves need to be sensitive to the fact that this is not an easy time. That’s why we're using very experienced trainers, many of whom are Arab colleagues.   The DW Akademie project "Election reporting and political communication in North Africa 2012" is supporting specific media outlets in Tunisia, Libya and Egypt. Our partners in Cairo are the private stations ON-TV and 25TV, the online news platform Masrawy, the citizen journalists' network RNN and the Egyptian Journalists' Association. Partners receive workshops, on-the-job training and consulting services. The focus is on free, balanced and independent election reporting. DW Akademie also offers the partners train-the-trainer workshops so that participants can effectively pass on their newly-acquired skills. The project is sponsored by Germany's Federal Foreign Office.


Egypt electoral commission confirms first round results Egyptian officials have confirmed that Mohammed Mursi and Ahmed Shafiq will advance to a second round presidential runoff in June. But several other prominent candidates dispute the results of the first round. Egypt's electoral commission confirmed on Monday that the Muslim Brotherhood will face off against Hosni Mubarak's final prime minister in the second round of the presidential election scheduled for June 16-17. Electoral commission chief Farouq Sultan told a televised news conference in Cairo that no candidate managed to receive a majority during the two days of voting on May 23-24. As a consequence, the top polling Muslim Brotherhood candidate Mohammed Mursi and former Mubarak-era prime minister Ahmed Shafiq will advance to a runoff vote. "No candidate won an outright majority, so according to Article 40 of the presidential election law, there will be a runoff between Mursi and Shafiq," Sultan said. Mursi won 24.3 percent of the votes, slightly ahead of Shafiq's 23.3 percent. Egypt's first competitive presidential election drew a 46 percent turnout among the country's 50 million eligible voters, according to the electoral commission. Brotherhood vs. Mubarak holdover The Muslim Brotherhood has tried to rally the supporters of the other 11 candidates who ran in the presidential election, painting Shafiq as a threat to the revolution that ousted Hosni Mubarak. Shafiq's brief tenure as prime minister came to an end when Mubarak was forced to resign on February 11, 2011 amid an unprecedented 18-day popular uprising. Like Mubarak, Shafiq also served as commander of the Egyptian air force from 1991-2002.  But he has sought to distance himself from the defunct Mubarak regime, recently stating that Egypt has entered a new era and there would be no return to the past. Shafiq will likely seek the support of more secular Egyptians who fear that the Muslim Brotherhood will implement some form of Islamic law if it wins the presidential election. The Brotherhood already controls around 50 percent of the seats in Egypt's parliament. Results challenged As the two official winners now seek to court the opposition, several of the more prominent losing candidates have challenged the legitimacy of the results altogether. Abdel Moneim Abol Fotouh, an independent Islamist who was once a member of the Muslim Brotherhood, alleged that "millions of pounds were stolen and distributed to people to buy vote." He also claimed that representatives of candidates had been refused access to polling stations during the vote counting. Independent Islamist Fotouh has outright rejected the first round results "I reject these results and do not recognize them," Fotouh told a news conference prior to the electoral commission's announcement. The commission put Fotouh at fourth place with 17.2 percent of the vote. "The national conscience does not allow for labeling these elections honest," he added. Leftist candidate Hamdeen Sabahi had called on Sunday for a recount, claiming that he had been cheated of coming second place due to electoral violations. Sabahi came in third with 20.7 percent of the vote, according to the official tally. Amr Moussa, the former head of the Arab League and a foreign minister under Mubarak, also raised questions about the first round result, claiming violations had occurred. "There are question marks on the result of the election," Moussa, who won 10.9 percent, told a news conference prior to the commission's announcement. "There were violations, but this should not change our minds on democracy and the necessity of choosing our president." slk/pfd (AP, AFP, Reuters, dpa)


Egypt: A taste of media freedom A year after the fall of the Mubarak regime Egyptian media are still fighting for more independence. "Those currently in power haven't given up control of the media," says DW Akademie regional coordinator Jens-Uwe Rahe. This March DW Akademie is inviting 15 Egyptian journalists and media officals to learn more about Germany's system of media self-regulation. "There'll be representatives from state and private media, from print, radio and television, as well as liberals and Muslim Brothers," says Jens-Uwe Rahe. "We want to show that responsible media can regulate themselves when broad press freedoms exist." Reporters in Cairo But this is not the case in Egypt. Last year, Reporters Without Borders dropped the country 39 positions on its press freedom barometer, ranking it 166 between Laos and Cuba. The Egyptian media's optimism following the revolution has faded. The military council curbs any criticism of its governing style or doubts about its democratic goals. Bloggers have been arrested and journalists attacked.  Rahe has visited Cairo five times since March 2011 to assess training needs and meet with potential partners. "Our goal is to support reform-oriented journalists and media organizations. We believe independent reporting is the prerequisite for a genuine public discussion. This stabilizes and spurs on the democratization process," says Rahe. Demonstrations on Tahrir Square DW Akademie works in Cairo primarily with private media such as the ON-TV online news channel and the online provider Linkonline. The focus is on news, political formats and online video reporting. DW Akademie is planning a Master's program in media management together with the German University in Cairo (GUC) and is also training Cairo University students and lecturers in practical online journalism.  DW Akademie also maintains contact with the state media. The state broadcaster lost credibility due to its role during the revolution. Critics accuse it of still serving those in power but the broadcaster says it wants to reform. DW Akademie is planning to hold an initial workshop for news reporters. Jens-Uwe Rahe, regional coordinator for Egypt "Our projects are welcomed in Egypt," says Jens-Uwe Rahe, referring to reports that the government there is increasingly skeptical of foreign support. "We're not affected by this," he says. "We can work without restrictions and have more possibilities than before the revolution."  A limiting factor for media development is the ambiguous political framework. It remains unclear as to how a future government would organize the media system. But Rahe is certain of one thing: "Egyptian journalists have had a taste of freedom and they're going to hold on to it."


Renewed clashes rock Cairo Nine people have been killed in a resurgence of violence in the Egyptian capital, Cairo. Security forces have moved to seal off areas around the cabinet offices where protesters have camped since late November. For the second day in a row, Egyptian security forces and anti-military protesters battled in central Cairo on Saturday. Nine people have died and some 300 people have been injured in the renewed violence, according to the country's Health Ministry. Hundreds of protesters threw stones and Molotov cocktails at soldiers after the military set up a no-go zone surrounded by razor-wire barriers near Tahrir Square. Protesters had been camped outside of cabinet offices to prevent newly appointed Prime Minister Kamal el-Ganzouri from entering. News agency Reuters reported that witnesses had seen soldiers using electric cattle prods against the protesters. Pictures appearing to show a military policeman dragging several women by the hair and beating a woman who appeared to be in her 50s have quickly spread across the Internet. Among the dead was Emad Effat, a senior cleric in the government-run Dar al-Ifta, the official interpreter of Islamic law, the institution said in a statement published by news agency MENA. Call for calm France responded on Saturday to what appears to have been a new level of force used by the military against pro-democracy activists. "France is worried about the violent incidents that have taken place on Tahrir Square in Cairo," a foreign ministry statement said, adding that Paris "denounces the violence and excessive use of force against protesters." Speaking at a news conference on Saturday, however, el-Ganzouri defended the response of security forces, accusing "thugs" of initiating tensions by throwing firebombs at its forces outside the cabinet building.  While accepting that people had died, he denied that the military and police had fired at protesters, claiming "a group came from the back and fired at protesters." He went on to call the anti-military protests "anti-revolution." "Those who are in Tahrir Square are not the youth of the revolution … this is not a revolution, but a counter-revolution," he said. In an attempt to quell tensions Hussein Tantawi, the head of the Supreme Council of the Armed Forces (SCAF), has ordered that all wounded civilians should be treated at military hospitals, thought by many to be better equipped than their civilian counterparts. Increasingly unpopular The latest clashes were triggered late on Thursday when soldiers stormed an anti-military protest camp outside the cabinet building near Tahrir Square, expelling demonstrators who were demanding an end to military rule. The military took over in Egypt after longtime President Hosni Mubarak was driven from power by popular protest in February. In the absence of a president, the military remains the ultimate authority on all matters of state.  Egypt held the second round of parliamentary voting on Wednesday It was initially welcomed by many as a "protector of the revolution." Tensions have since swelled, however, and some protesters have called for an immediate transfer of power to a civilian authority. The protests have marred a recent parliamentary election, the first since the fall of Mubarak. Islamist parties won a clear majority of seats in the first round of voting last month. The country remained calm during a second round in nine of the country's 27 provinces on Wednesday and Thursday and results are expected in the coming days. The rest of the country is set to vote next month. The young activists who led the movement against Mubarak have not translated that success into victory at the polls, while the Islamists - long repressed under Mubarak - look to be on the verge of gaining power. Author: Charlotte Chelsom-Pill, Holly Fox (AFP, AP, dpa, Reuters) Editor: Martin Kuebler


Egypt defends NGO raids Egyptian officials have defended sweeps through the offices of human rights and pro-democracy organizations in its capital, rejecting sharp rebukes from the US, Germany and UN. Egypt's government has denied accusations from human rights groups that it was trying to stifle opponents of the ruling military council when it swept through the offices of 17 non-governmental organizations last week. Two government ministers told a news conference on Sunday that the authorities had acted within the law as part of an investigation into the illegal funding by foreign countries of political activities in Egypt. Justice Minister Adel Abdel Hamid Abdullah and Planning and International Cooperation Minister Fayza Abul Naga told reporters that prosecutors were justified in their actions due to concerns that the NGOs appeared to have broken Egyptian law on political funding by foreign entities. "Foreign organizations have illegally opened offices in Egypt since the January 25 revolution and have broken the law on associations," Abul Naga said, referring to the mass protest that led to the ouster of President Hosni Mubarak last year. Investigation ongoing Abdel Hamid said that the probe was looking into whether these groups were behind the demonstrations in Cairo's Tahrir Square, the center of the country's pro-democracy movement. The German Adenauer foundation office in Cairo was searched by police Hassiba Hadj Sahraoui, the Deputy Middle East-Africa Program Director for Amnesty International in London, told Deutsche Welle that the Egyptian authorities were looking at about 300 organizations for possible foreign funding. The United States, Germany and the United Nations issued strong rebukes concerning the raids, calling on Egyptian authorities to halt the harassment of NGO staff. Police confiscated computers and documents in last Thursday's NGO raids on – among others - the Konrad-Adenauer-Foundation of Germany and three privately funded US groups: the International Republican Institute, the National Democratic Institute and Freedom House. The head of the Adenauer foundation's office in Cairo, Andreas Jacobs, has also been called to face questioning in the next few days. The executive director of the foundation in Germany, Hans-Gert Pöttering, urged the Egyptian authorites "not to obstruct the foundation's valuable work building democratic institutions" in Egypt. The US State Department hinted that Egypt runs the risk of losing $1.5 billion (1.15 billion euros) in US military aid under a bill enacted a week ago linking assistance to moves toward democracy. "Actions like these are another reason why my appropriations sub-committee refused to give a blank check of foreign aid to the Egyptian military," said US Senator Patrick Leahy in a statement. Egypt has promised to end the raids and return seized property, but said that property would only be given back after the investigation was completed. Author: Gregg Benzow (AFP, AP, Reuters) Editor: Ben Knight


Opinion: A historic day in Cairo Hosni Mubarak ruled Egypt for 30 years. In February, he stepped down after weeks of protest against his regime. Now, Egyptians are thrilled to see him on trial, according to DW's Bettina Marx. History was made in Cairo today. For the first time, a toppled dictator has had to stand trial and answer to his country's judiciary, and thus his people. Hosni Mubarak, who ruled Egypt for 30 years, has been forced to stand before a court. In fact, in his case, it was rather to lie than to stand, since the aged ex-president was wheeled into the courtroom on a stretcher. He was locked into a cage along with his two sons, former interior minister Habib al-Adli and other defendants to attend the opening of the trial and the reading of the charges. Pictures of defendants behind bars are not uncommon in Egypt: people have seen terrorists on trial, as well as opponents of the regime and members of the democratic opposition, suppressed, persecuted, gagged and tortured for years by Mubarak and his security forces. Bettina Marx Now, representatives of this very regime stand before the judge and the people. It is hard not to feel a certain degree of satisfaction upon seeing them on trial. But this trial is not about revenge, it is about justice for the victims of the revolution who were killed or injured by Mubarak's henchmen. It's about justice for citizens who were kept from participating in the political process for decades and cheated out of prosperity and a future by their greedy leader and his corrupt cronies. Many can expect to be spared The shame and disgrace of this public trial have caught up with Mubarak, his sons and some of his former party followers. Others who are guilty and who profited from the Mubarak regime still await charges - although it is already clear that many of those who bear a share of the responsibility will never be brought to trial. For instance the military that Mubarak relied on for decades and that profited from his kleptocratic rule: they now stand at the head of the state and no one knows whether they will pass on that power to a democratically elected government. Mubarak's friends in the western democracies will not be held accountable, either. They will explain away their support of the dictator as a political necessity, as strategic thinking. But the citizens of the countries in question should not forget that their governments were loyal to Mubarak even as the Egyptians were already taking to the streets in protest. It wasn't until it became clear that he would not last that they dropped him. On this historic day in Cairo, western leaders should consider whether it isn't a day of shame for them, too. Author: Bettina Marx / db Editor: Michael Lawton


Egypt: New challenges The Egyptian media are reporting as freely as never before. But there are still limits, and the new authorities can be easily irritated. The latest example: a blogger has been sentenced to three years in prison. Since the revolution on January 25th the cards have been re-shuffled in the Egyptian media. Newspapers, television and radio stations can report almost uncensored and political taboos are few. After 30 years under Mubarak’s regime mouthpieces of the opposition are making the most use of this new freedom – with success. Their circulations and quotas are soaring. Tilman Rascher, head of DW-AKADEMIE’s Middle East division “The losers here are definitely the government media,” says Tilman Rascher, head of DW-AKADEMIE’s Middle East division. “They supported former president Hosni Mubarak during the revolution, and then abruptly changed sides when he was overthrown.” The pro-government Egyptian daily newspaper Al-Ahram and the state broadcaster ERTU for example, re-positioned themselves overnight and have lost credibility, he says. By comparison, social media channels have gained prominence. “They were the deciding factor in the revolution,” Rascher emphasizes. “It remains to be seen what they can contribute to the democratization process.” The initial euphoria was dampened at the beginning of April when a military court sentenced a blogger to three years in prison. The court judged that the Internet activist had insulted the military, published false information and disrupted law and order. Human rights and journalists’ organizations criticized the verdict. Arab bloggers at the Young Media Summit 2010 in Cairo Besides bloggers, the conventional media will also play a key role in the upcoming parliamentary and presidential elections. DW-AKADEMIE will be supporting them with reporting skills workshops. “We’re reacting promptly to the new situation, especially with regard to the elections. We’re offering workshops for journalists in May and July, and they’ll be concentrating on election reporting,” says Rascher. DW-AKADEMIE is forging plans to work together with two universities – the German University in Cairo and the Media Faculty at the Cairo University. The focus will be on supporting practical training for online journalism. After the parliamentary elections there are plans to develop a press code together with Egyptian media professionals and journalists.  Projects which began prior to the revolution will be continued. Last year the Young Media Summit – a dialogue between Arab and German bloggers – took place in Cairo. This year DW-AKADEMIE is organizing another dialogue, this time on “Reforms in the Arabic World”. A new project, “Shabab”, will also be launched. This will be an online platform focusing on Arabic youth and democratization processes. “The biggest challenge at this point is finding the right partners,” says Rascher. Egypt is still in transition. “We’ll be watching the developments after the elections in order to decide more precisely on the next steps to take.”


Egypt: New challenges The Egyptian media are reporting as freely as never before. But there are still limits, and the new authorities can be easily irritated. The latest example: a blogger has been sentenced to three years in prison. Since the revolution on January 25th the cards have been re-shuffled in the Egyptian media. Newspapers, television and radio stations can report almost uncensored and political taboos are few. After 30 years under Mubarak’s regime mouthpieces of the opposition are making the most use of this new freedom – with success. Their circulations and quotas are soaring. Tilman Rascher, head of DW-AKADEMIE’s Middle East division “The losers here are definitely the government media,” says Tilman Rascher, head of DW-AKADEMIE’s Middle East division. “They supported former president Hosni Mubarak during the revolution, and then abruptly changed sides when he was overthrown.” The pro-government Egyptian daily newspaper Al-Ahram and the state broadcaster ERTU for example, re-positioned themselves overnight and have lost credibility, he says. By comparison, social media channels have gained prominence. “They were the deciding factor in the revolution,” Rascher emphasizes. “It remains to be seen what they can contribute to the democratization process.” The initial euphoria was dampened at the beginning of April when a military court sentenced a blogger to three years in prison. The court judged that the Internet activist had insulted the military, published false information and disrupted law and order. Human rights and journalists’ organizations criticized the verdict. Arab bloggers at the Young Media Summit 2010 in Cairo Besides bloggers, the conventional media will also play a key role in the upcoming parliamentary and presidential elections. DW-AKADEMIE will be supporting them with reporting skills workshops. “We’re reacting promptly to the new situation, especially with regard to the elections. We’re offering workshops for journalists in May and July, and they’ll be concentrating on election reporting,” says Rascher. DW-AKADEMIE is forging plans to work together with two universities – the German University in Cairo and the Media Faculty at the Cairo University. The focus will be on supporting practical training for online journalism. After the parliamentary elections there are plans to develop a press code together with Egyptian media professionals and journalists.  Projects which began prior to the revolution will be continued. Last year the Young Media Summit – a dialogue between Arab and German bloggers – took place in Cairo. This year DW-AKADEMIE is organizing another dialogue, this time on “Reforms in the Arabic World”. A new project, “Shabab”, will also be launched. This will be an online platform focusing on Arabic youth and democratization processes. “The biggest challenge at this point is finding the right partners,” says Rascher. Egypt is still in transition. “We’ll be watching the developments after the elections in order to decide more precisely on the next steps to take.”


Egypt: Young Media Summit 2011 - "New Media and Reform in the Arab World" At the invitation of DW Akademie and the German Information Center Cairo, 18 bloggers from the Arab world and Germany will meet from May 24-26, 2011 in the Egyptian capital for the second Young Media Summit. After the success of the first Young Media Summit in October 2010, the 2011 event will see 12 bloggers from the Arab world and six from Germany gathering in Cairo to hold discussions and blog around the theme of "New Media and Reform in the Arab World." Those from the Arab world include bloggers from Egypt, Tunisia, Algeria, Syria, Bahrain, the Palestinian Territories, Lebanon and Yemen.  During the revolutions in Tunisia and Egypt, the opposition used social networks to organize protests and mobilize large numbers of people. Bloggers reported during the demonstrations on events that were ignored by state-run media. But now, what kind of role can bloggers play after the fall of the old regimes? What can they do to help shape societal reforms and ensure that the interests of the young generation are taken into account?  The participants will report on the various discussions on the online platform of the Young Media Summit as well as on their own blogs. At the same time, they will investigate various topics on their own, such as the changing relationship between Egyptians and the state, and the role of women during and after the revolution.  "The situation in Egypt has changed completely since the last conference, which will allow participants to talk even more openly," says Jens-Uwe Rahe, project manager with DW Akademie. "Many bloggers and Internet users are asking how they might contribute in the long-term to the transformation of their country and their society."  During a final podium discussion, summit participants will present their results and impressions and will discuss them with the audience. The event, scheduled for May 26, 2011 at Cairo University's Faculty of Mass Communications, is called "Between Tahrir Square, Facebook and Al Jazeera: People and Media in the Arab Revolution."  In addition, the Arabic television service of Deutsche Welle, DW-TV ARABIA, will produce a one-hour talk show during the event in which Arab and German conference participants will discuss issues with a young audience. The show will be broadcast on May 27, 2011 on DW-TV ARABIA.   The goal of the Young Media Summit is to strengthen cultural dialog and promote networking and the exchange of ideas between young media makers from the Arabic-speaking world and Germany. The Young Media Summit is organized by Deutsche Welle''s DW Akademie in cooperation with the German Information Center Cairo of the German Embassy in Cairo. The annual conference, which is funded by the German Foreign Ministry, focuses on a different topic every year.


All passengers and crew freed from hijacked plane in Malta A Libyan aircraft with 118 people on board landed in Malta after it was hijacked. All of the passengers and crew have since been released. The hijackers were said to be members of a pro-Gadhafi group. The two Libyan hijackers have also left the plane with the final crew members in the small European nation. The state-owned Afriqiyah Airways A320 jet was flying an internal route from Sebha to Tripoli carrying 111 passengers and seven crew members, when it was hijacked and forced to land on the Mediterranean island. Maltese Prime Minister Joseph Muscat confirmed that hijackers were arrested after leaving the plane. Earlier he tweeted that 82 males, 28 females and one infant are on board the aircraft. A Libyan lawmaker, who spoke to a colleague aboard the flight, said that there were two hijackers armed with hand grenades. They appeared to be in their mid 20s, deputy Hadi al-Saghir said after reportedly talking to fellow member of parliament, Abdusalem Mrabit. Maltese state television TVM said the hijackers threatened to explode the plane if their demands were not met. The Times of Malta reported that the suspects were from a Libyan pro-Gadhafi group Al Fatah Al Gadida, and one of them was seen waving a green flag, presumed to be an old flag of Libya, from the plane's door. The pilot of the plane, Ali Milad, said that the hijackers initially demanded that he head to Rome. Speaking to Libya Channel TV network, he added that the men wanted to set up a political party called "the New Fateh," referencing the Fateh revolution by the late Libyan dictator Moammar Gadhafi. In a tweet, the TV station also quoted one of the hijackers as saying: "We took this measure to declare and promote our new party." Prime Minister Muscat spoke to the head of Libyan unity government Fayez Serraj, Muscat's office said. 'It was a very good day' At a Friday press conference, Muscat denied earlier reports that hijackers had requested political asylum. The officials told them that they would have to release the hostages for "any discussion to be entertained," Muscat said, confirming that the hijackers turned themselves in and were being questioned. "They were found to be in possession of a hand grenade and a pistol," he said at a press conference. Security forces were searching the plane and have already discovered another pistol, Muscat added. The authorities were also interviewing passengers and crew, Muscat said, adding that "arrangements will be made" for them to continue their journey. "God willing, it was a very good day, with no casualties," he concluded. Later on Friday, however, the government announced that the weapons used in the hijack were fake. "Initial forensic investigations about the attempted hijack |...| shows that the weapons used were identical replica weapons." officials said. Troops were positioned a few hundred meters from the plane during the stand-off. The pilot of the Afriqiyah Airways plane told the Tripoli control tower that the aircraft had been hijacked, a senior security official at Tripoli's Mitiga airport told Reuters news agency. "The pilot reported to the control tower in Tripoli that they were being hijacked, then they lost communication with him," the official said on condition of anonymity. "The pilot tried very hard to have them land at the correct destination but they refused," the official added. Flights in or out of the airport were initially delayed or diverted - including a Lufthansa flight - but airport operations have meanwhile resumed. The tiny Mediterranean island of Malta is located around 500 km (300 miles) north of the Libyan coast. The last major hijacking in Malta took place in 1985 when Palestinian militants took over an EgyptAir plane. Dozens of people were killed when Egyptian commandos stormed the aircraft. rs/sms (AP, AFP, dpa, Reuters)


Egypt's women find their voice against sexual harassment Women who experience sexual assault in Egypt have begun asserting themselves, say local NGOs. Ever more are reporting harassment to police and fighting for their abusers to be jailed. Menna A. Farouk reports from Cairo. "It was tough to get him to the police station," says Nemaa Gamal, 32, of the man who assaulted her. Weary after a day's work, she was shocked when a man openly groped her from behind as she rode home with a friend on a Cairo microbus in 2013. "I screamed at the top of my lungs and told the driver to stop at the nearest police station," she says. Luckily, the driver was helpful and a police station was near. But the attacker, a 52-year-old man, squeezed out of a bus window and took off running. Her friend jumped out of the bus with Gamal and caught the assailant and dragged him to the police station. Then Gamal's search for a lawyer began. Progress since revolution Sexual harassment has long been a problem in Egypt, especially during national and religious holidays, but it became a subject of intense public debate following the 2011 uprising against then-president Hosni Mubarak. Then reports of mass sexual assaults, harassment and rape on Cairo's Tahrir Square made national - and international - headlines. Tahrir Square was closely associated with the revolution and later notorious for the sexual assaults that occurred there "Constant media coverage of the sexual attacks that took place during protests in Tahrir Square during and after the revolution helped uproot public denial of the phenomenon," Entessar el-Saeed, executive director of the Cairo Center for Development, a leading women's rights group, told DW. In the wake of the revolution, volunteers organized campaigns to rescue women subjected to mob attacks during protests, anti-harassment graffiti appeared on walls around downtown Cairo, and more women started to publicly share their own stories of sexual harassment. It was made a crime carrying jail sentences and fines in 2014. The law, which includes a prison sentence and a fine or both, states that a sexual harasser is one who accosts others in a public or private place through following or stalking them, using gestures or words or through modern means of communications or in any other means through actions that carry sexual or pornographic hints. Since the revolution, non-governmental organizations and human rights groups have begun seeing a transformation in women's attitudes towards the phenomenon. They say more cases are being reported and more harassers jailed. "Of course, there is progress," said el-Saeed, explaining that her organization had won more than 15 sexual harassment cases since 2013, most of which resulted in prison terms after the new law came into effect the following year, a few days before the inauguration of President Abdel-Fattah el-Sissi. Later that year, Sissi visited a woman in a Cairo hospital after she was brutally assaulted by a group of men during celebrations of his inauguration in Tahrir Square. Sissi gave her flowers, apologized and vowed to crack down on sexual harassment. The following month, seven men were sentenced to life and two men to 20 years over assaults around Tahrir Square. Long arm of the law At the police station, Nemaa Gamal, with her friend as a witness, reported that she had been sexually harassed. Gamal found the courage to pursue the man who harassed her "Actually, if it were not for my courage at the time and the help of my friend, I think I would not be able to sue the harasser," Gamal said. "Six years ago, I could not do that," she added, highlighting her change of personality and recalling her frustration at the police officers' attitude when she first went to report a sexual assault in 2010. "When I was sexually harassed that year, I burst into tears. I then ran to the police station to report what happened. But the police mocked me and gave me a false report number," she said. Gamal had been attacked by a man who was trying to grope her from behind as she walked along a crowded street. "At the time, I was not aware enough. I did not know how I can convict a harasser," she says. Then she began attending awareness campaigns about sexual abuse put on by several Egyptian NGOs. "So, when it happened again in 2013, I knew what to do," she adds. Ways to resist Numerous groups have played a part spreading awareness at the country's universities and broadcasting public service spots against sexual harassment on television and radio. Anti-harassment units where women can report incidents have been set up at police stations, in the public transport system and at universities. The Interior Ministry has deployed female police officers to the streets on holidays to help prevent sexual harassment. There are still women who feel uncomfortable about reporting to police stations, but they have found another way of resisting, said Fathi Farid, a founder of the anti-harassment initiative Aman ("Safety"). "Some women have started to use electrical rods and cheaper weapons, like pepper spray and nail files. They also sometimes take video and photos of their harassers and post them on social network sites to disclose their indecent acts," Farid told DW. At a booth at Ain Shams University, one of the country's largest, a group of students - male and female - recently gathered to raise awareness (photo, above) as part of a global campaign against gender-based violence. Nora Sameh, one of the volunteers, said she had started to take action herself: "I hit them with my bag, curse them and sometimes run after them," the 21-year-old said. The atmosphere in Egypt is changing slowly, women say Sameh said she had once reported sexual harassment, but nothing happened. That's why she had started to retaliate. "This thing with sexual harassment, I used to tell no one," she said. "Now I tell everyone and write about it on social media. That is the only way I can fight it," she said, adding that she was seeing very slow change. Vindication in court Nemaa Gamal said it was a long struggle to get her harasser to court. A friend who saw her Facebook post about the incident helped her make contact with the NGO that took up her case pro bono. "It did not take long to get a lawyer, but what took really long were the legal procedures. It took us about one and a half years to get the case to court," she said. Her determination paid off when the court - in its first session - sentenced the harasser to five years in prison. "We have to stand up to it and resist," Gamal said. "Otherwise, it will spread more and more and no one will be able to stop it."


North Korea's cell phone boom North Korea has one of the fastest growing 3G mobile phone networks. According to an Egyptian telecom firm that has partnered with Pyongyang, hundreds of thousands of North Koreans are signing up for the new service. North Korea is often described as a black hole, stuck in a sort of Soviet era time warp.  So it might be surprising that North Korea has a quickly expanding 3G mobile phone network. It also might be surprising that there’s a video on Youtube promoting it.  After an animated intro, a voice-over says that Koryolink, the name of the cellular service, started in December 2008 as a joint venture between the government and Orascom, an Egyptian telecommunications firm. For the moment, it says, Koryolink only offers voice and SMS services. There are now 500,000 subscribers and the market is growing And judging by the shots of people talking on their mobiles, it appears that smart phones have yet to hit the market.    Egyptian model   Calls to Ezz Heikal, the Egyptian CEO of Koryolink in Pyongyang, could not go through. But in an e -mail, he wrote that the service currently has around a half a million subscribers, up from just 1,600 two years ago. Service is paid for with a mix of local and foreign currencies.  Heikal says that even though North Koreans can only make and receive domestic calls, it’s a good start for the nation after not being allowed to use cell phones for several years.  North Korea banned cell phones in 2004, after what some analysts suspect was the cell phone-triggered bombing of a train station. Some speculate it was a failed assassination attempt on leader Kim Jong-il. But some observers say Pyongyang’s new partnership with Orascom has given officials confidence that this technology won’t be used against them. Martyn Williams is Tokyo bureau chief of the IT media company IDG and runs the North Korea Tech blog. He says, "By working with the Egyptian government, they’re also working with a country that has been very friendly to North Korea. So, I think they can be assured that the network will be employed in a way that gives them the ability to control it." The social uprising in Egypt is said to have been inspired by new forms of communication Cell phone revolution   Of course, that Egyptian government was overthrown by a popular revolution that was spurred on by the use of cell phones and social media. But Koryolink isn’t the only cell phone network that can be picked up there, Williams says.  Many North Korean refugees in the south speak with family via phones that receive Chinese wireless signals from across the border. One survey says that as many as 3,000 calls are made each day between the two Koreas on this network. 54 –year-old Kim Tae Jin defected to South Korea in 2001 and now works for the human rights group NK Gulag in Seoul. He says North Korean police are cracking down on these phones. "Its considered a political crime to use Chinese cell phones, Kim says. When we talk to North Koreans, they have to turn the phones on and off frequently, so the authorities can’t monitor and track down the signal."  Kim says he doesn’t know if North Korean authorities monitor the new 3G network, too. But he says most people there already know better than to say anything over the phone that could be considered a political crime.  Author: Jason Strother Editor: Sarah Berning


Salafists stoke fears of rising extremism in Egypt's power vacuum As secular and Islamic groups prepare for Egypt's first free elections later this year, the unchecked rise of the Islamist Salafi sect is causing concern among Egyptians who fear its violent extremist agenda. In Egypt's post-revolution climate, anything seems possible - both good and bad. The possibility for a country rebuilt on democratic vales and freedom remains the dream of many of those who demonstrated for weeks to bring down the repressive regime of former president Hosni Mubarak in February. With Egypt's first free elections planned for September, the pro-democracy movement hopes that a new positive era will begin soon after. However, the removal of Mubarak has also provided new opportunities for groups with different beliefs and objectives, some of which are accused of wanting an even more extreme form of repression and control than that inflicted on them for 30 years by their former leader. One of these groups, the Islamist Salafi sect, is causing widespread concern in Egypt by taking the opportunity afforded them by Mubarak's ousting to form political parties in a bid to exert its influence in a new Egyptian power structure. The Sunni-Muslim sect was viewed suspiciously by the Mubarak regime which repressed it and suspected it of being violent extremists, blaming it for a number of militant attacks. But in contrast to the Muslim Brotherhood opposition movement, which was banned before Mubarak was forced from power, the Salafists were never seen as a political threat as their leaders preached an apolitical Islam. Since Mubarak departed, however, the Salafists seem to have reversed part of their ideology which regarded democratic politics as a Western invention. Some view this as a positive move, saying that the Salafists involvement in the new democratic process planned for Egypt will temper some of their more extreme views. Others are afraid that the Salafists wish to take advantage of the slow progress being made by secular groups preparing for the elections to promote their own radical view of how the new Egypt should be structured. Salafists rise unchecked Western concerns focus on the Muslim Brotherhood while Egyptians say the Salafists are the threat While many are suspicious of the Muslim Brotherhood's intentions, others are downright terrified of the Salafists who they say are determined to turn Egypt into a Sharia state in line with their beliefs that most modern Muslims follow a corrupted version of Islam that should be abandoned in favor of the practices of the first three generations of Muslims, the Salaf, from which they take their name. "The West has overlooked this group with their obsession and often rather uninformed views about the Muslim Brotherhood," Almut Möller, a Middle East expert at the German Council on Foreign Relations, told Deutsche Welle. "While many Egyptians really want to change their country and are proud of what they have achieved so far, there are also many people that have fear of the Salafists. A climate of fear in the country might become another burden to the transition to democracy." Nathan Brown, an Egypt expert at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace in Washington, believes that the concerns expressed about the Salafists in Egypt have less to do with their international agenda and affiliations, for example their possible ties to al Qaeda, and more to do with their actions inside the country. "There are four main concerns in Egypt about the Salafists," he told Deutsche Welle. "Firstly, that their conception of Egyptian political community is exclusively religious and therefore leaves no room for the Christian Copts; secondly that their interpretation of Islam is narrow and impractical, and out of tune with what most Egyptians want." "Thirdly, that they do not accept the rules of democratic politics but seek to impose their views by religious argumentation and force, and finally that they have a sufficient popular following to affect electoral outcomes in a way that many Egyptians do not like." The Salafist goal of a Sharia state is one which was shared by Osama bin Laden, a link which is making many people in Egypt very nervous despite the sect's position as a minority within the country and the assertion of experts that extremists in Egypt have no links to the deceased bin Laden's al-Qaeda network. "There is no connection between Egyptian extremists and al Qaeda's headquarters in Pakistan and Afghanistan or other radical jihad movements worldwide," Khalil Al Anani an author and specialist in political Islamic affairs, told Deutsche Welle. "There are ideological touch stones, but there is no organizational coordination between them." Objectives through violence Recent violence has been blamed on Salafists who have been accused of targeting Coptic churches While there may be no direct coordination between al Qaeda and Egyptian extremist groups like the Salafists, it is these ideological touch stones which are of concern. Even with bin Laden dead, his philosophy remains inspirational to those who may have not been affiliated with his network but consider his goals close to their own. "It is highly likely that Salafists will turn to violence, particularly as they lack other forms of appeal," Kristian Ulrichsen, Middle East expert at the London School of Economics, told Deutsche Welle. "They have a track record of doing so in the past, and raising sectarian tensions to split the Egyptian people is another part of their tactics of divide and rule." "The Salafists recourse to violence and their uncompromising views on the way that politics and life choices should be structured are completely at odds with the guiding principles of the Egyptian Revolution, which was based on millions of people making non-violent choices in favor of democracy, human rights, justice and dignity." The Salafists are being blamed for stoking the recent sectarian and religious violence which has seen clashes between hard-line Islamists and Coptic Christians across Egypt and were blamed by the former Mubarak regime for bomb attacks on churches earlier in the year. Fear of al Qaeda infiltration Concern over their possible embracing of al-Qaeda values and tactics was also raised when hundreds of Salafists organized a "prayer for the absent" for Osama bin Laden at the al-Nour mosque in the Cairo district of Abasiyah last week before marching on the American embassy to protest the al Qaeda leader's death.  Zawahiri's leadership is unlikely to inspire al Qaeda in Egypt  There are also fears that should the Egyptian Ayman Al-Zawahiri become the new leader of al Qaeda, his background of extremism and jihadism in Egypt may inspire the Salafists further and lead to a direct link being forged with al Qaeda. However, Kristian Ulrichsen thinks the changes that Egypt has experienced in the last few months have made it harder, not easier for al Qaeda to get a foothold in the country. "The movement that ousted Mubarak was based on support for justice, dignity, and a desire for democracy, and not on Islamist ideals. This is a very significant point as the Egyptian people demonstrated that there is more to regional political dynamics that merely Islamism or Arabism." Author: Nick Amies Editor: Rob Mudge


A look at the recipients of the 'Alternative Nobel Prize' Four people and organizations have been chosen for what is widely known as the "Alternative Nobel Prize." The four have addressed free speech, war, women's rights and migrants. A volunteer rescue group in Syria, a Russian human rights defender, an Egyptian women's rights advocate and a Turkish newspaper have won what is commonly known as the "Alternative Nobel Prize." "This year's Right Livelihood Award Laureates confront some of the most pressing global issues head-on — be it war, freedom of speech, women's rights or the plight of migrants," Ole von Uexkull, the executive director of the Livelihood Award Foundation, said in announcing the winners. The four award recipients will share the 315,000 euro ($354,000) prize to advance their work. The White Helmets Pulling people out of bombed out rubble, providing first aid and emergency assistance, the Syrian Civil Defense group was awarded "for their outstanding bravery, compassion and humanitarian engagement in rescuing civilians from the destruction of the Syrian civil war." Also known as the White Helmets, the group was established in late 2012 to save civilian lives in opposition controlled areas under constant threat from Syrian and Russian aerial bombing. Bakers, tailors, salespersons and teachers, the group of 3,000 volunteers have been trained to be firefighters, search and rescue workers and medics. They also help to repair damaged infrastructure and educate civilians about safety during bombings. Permalink http://p.dw.com/p/1K6Sc The White Helmets are barred from operating in regime controlled areas and have been deliberately targeted by the regime. Their bravery has helped save at least 60,000 lives in a burning six-year war that has left more than 400,000 dead and displaced millions of civilians. More than 100 White Helmut volunteers have been killed. "The White Helmets represent ordinary Syrians who want peace and security. These volunteers are a beacon of hope amid the human tragedy of the Syrian civil war. It is therefore even more horrifying that these first responders are themselves targeted," von Uexkull said. Raed al Saleh, Director of Syria Civil Defense, said the White Helmets were humbled to receive the award. "We are humbled to accept this incredibly prestigious award and sincerely hope that in the very near future we can put down our rescue tools and start the generational task of rebuilding Syria," he said. Svetlana Gannushkina Russia's Svetlana Gannushkina was recognized by the award committee "for her decades-long commitment to promoting human rights, justice for refugees and forced migrants, and tolerance among different ethnic groups." The organization that she founded and heads, the Civic Assistance Committee, has provided free legal support, aid and education to more than 50,000 migrants, refugees and internally displaced persons since 1990. The 74-year-old and her organization have advocated for migrants and prevented the deportation of thousands from Russia to Central Asian countries, "where they would have almost certainly been subject to imprisonment and torture," the award committee said. Gannushkina has also been active in human rights issues in the Caucasus, including Chechnya and Nagorno-Karabakh. "Svetlana Gannushkina is not only an outstanding human rights advocate but also a person of immense personal integrity who has fought injustice and indifference her whole life. At a time when xenophobia and intolerance is on the rise in many countries around the world, Gannushkina is an inspiring example of the best in human nature," von Uexkull said. Responding to receiving the award, Gannushkina said: "This award is a great honor and a show of solidarity for me and my colleagues working with migrants and refugees. Sadly, only a very small number of refugees are welcomed in Russia today, and migrants' rights are routinely violated." Mozn Hassan and Nazra for Feminist Studies Egyptian feminist and human rights defender Mozn Hassan and the organization she founded, the Nazra for Feminist Studies, won the award "for asserting the equality and rights of women in circumstances where they are subject to ongoing violence, abuse and discrimination." Hassan and Nazra helped to increase rights for women during and after the Egyptian revolution in 2011. Hassan advocated for women's rights to be included in the 2014 constitution and she has also helped victims of sexual violence to receive medical, psychological and legal support. Another accomplishment is her work to change Egyptian penal law to expand sexual crimes to include sexual harassment. She is also active in the Women's Political Academy, which helps mentor female politicians at the national and local level "Hassan's work has placed her in the crosshairs of various groups during an incredibly turbulent period in Egypt, culminating in the present crackdown on civil society and NGOs," von Uexkull said. Responding to receiving the award, Hassan said the award "is for every woman who has fought for her basic rights, who has combated and survived sexual violence, for all the women who fight daily to exist." Turkey's "Cumhuriyet" Turkey's independent "Cumhuriyet" newspaper received the award "for their fearless investigative journalism and commitment to freedom of expression in the face of oppression, censorship, imprisonment and death threats." The secular, center-left "Cumhuriyet" is Turkey's oldest newspaper. As press freedom in Turkey rapidly deteriorates under President Recep Tayyip Erdogan, the paper remains one of the few opposition newspapers in the country at a time the media environment is dominated by pro-government mouthpieces. "In the face of immense personal risks, Cumhuriyet is flying the flag of free speech in Turkey, during a critical time for the people of that nation," von Uexkull said. The paper's former editor-in-chief, Can Dundar, and its Ankara representative, Erdem Gul, were recently sentenced to five years in prison for reporting on Turkish intelligence arms shipments to Syrian rebels. The two journalists are appealing the court ruling. Dundar is being tried in absentia.


Iran tests the waters of changing Middle East with naval maneuvers With the Middle East experiencing its highest level of instability for many years, tensions increased Tuesday when Egyptian authorities allowed two Iranian warships to pass through the Suez Canal on their way to Syria. With autocratic regimes across North Africa and the Middle East under pressure from the wave of popular uprisings sweeping across the Arab world, both interim governments in countries such as Tunisia and Egypt and leaders clinging to power in other restive states are viewing the Iranian move with a mixture of concern and suspicion. Until recently, Egypt - under ousted President Hosni Mubarak - had prevented Iranian warships using the Suez Canal to reach the Mediterranean Sea for the sake of regional stability, even though there are no restrictions in international law that prevent Iran from using the 63-kilometer (101-mile) waterway. Despite being allowed to pass through the canal, Iranian naval vessels have not done so since before the 1979 Islamic revolution. Egypt gave the Iranian patrol frigate Alvand and the support ship Kharg permission to pass through the canal, reportedly on their way to Syria, early on Tuesday after ascertaining that the vessels were not carrying weapons or nuclear and chemical materials restricted under UN law. According to Iran's official Fars news agency, the 500-ton Alvand is normally armed with torpedoes and anti-ship missiles, while the larger 33,000-ton Kharg has a crew of 250 and can carry up to three helicopters. Egypt's new direction? The Iranians will reach the Mediterranean via the canal The u-turn by Egypt over its policy of allowing Iranian vessels through the Suez Canal raises questions over the future direction of the country as it struggles to stabilize after weeks of protests. However, Dr. Florence Gaub, a Middle East expert at the NATO Defense College in Rome, believes that it is unlikely that the decision to allow Iranian ships through the Suez Canal means that Egypt will now become an ally of Iran. "Removing Mubarak doesn't mean that his secular regime has been removed too," she told Deutsche Welle. "The current military rulers were part of that and will not suddenly become pro-Iran." Gaub said that Egypt probably looked at the potential for a diplomatic incident when receiving Iran's request for access and made a decision which would have the least impact on its already unstable situation. "The Egyptians have enough on their plate," she said. "There was no good reason not to allow the Iranians through." There are also concerns among regional powers which fear Iran's influence in the region that Tehran is exploiting the vacuum that has been created following the collapse of the government in Egypt to expand its reach. Iran takes center stage "Iran has tried to capitalise on the Arab uprisings to bolster its own national discourse and image of itself as a regional leader and of the guardian of Islam-inspired revolution," Dr. Elizabeth Iskander, an Iran expert at the London School of Economics and Political Science, told Deutsche Welle. "Arab and Western governments are highly alarmed at events, and Iran's move adds fuel to fears of instability and increased Islamist influence." Syria shares uneasy yet important relations with Iran "As we have seen from the WikiLeaks documents, Iran has not had good relations with many Arab states and now Tehran sees an opportunity to establish better relations with new regimes," said Gaub." What we've seen is that the best-organized protest movements have been Muslim ones, not necessarily fundamentalist, and Iran understands these better than secularist movements. Michael Bauer, an Iran expert from the Center for Applied Policy Research at the University of Munich, believes the destination of the ships also points to an Iranian effort to shore up one of its strongest, yet sometimes uneasy, alliances. "This deployment should be seen as a political signal that underscores Iran's regional ambitions while the destination of Syria is meant to underscore how close the relations between Tehran and Damascus are," Bauer told Deutsche Welle. "Syria is in the diplomatically comfortable position that the West and other regional actors such as Saudi Arabia need it as a partner," he added. The deployment also raises questions over the timing of the alleged training exercise, the destination of the Iranian vessels and the possible agenda behind Tehran's decision to literally test the waters at a time of great upheaval in such a volatile neighborhood. Iran favors relations with strong Islamic opposition groups "The timing is not a coincidence as it is sending a message of support to the opposition groups, saying that Iran is willing to approach anyone who may come to power in the Arab states," Gaub said."Iran is not as irrational as many people think. There is a plan here and that is to be on the side of the winners when the dust settles." Unsurprisingly, the Iranian move has caused outrage and concern in Israel. The deployment and route of the vessels, which will pass by Israeli territorial waters on their way to Syria, has been called a "provocation" by Israel, a country whose right to exist is still denied by Iran. Israel warns of 'provocation' Tehran's disputed nuclear program, its support of Islamist groups such as Hamas and Hezbollah, and Iranian President Mahmud Ahmadinejad's continued hard-line stance against "the Zionist occupiers," has worsened the enmity between the two nations in recent years. Any Iranian military action - however innocuous - has Israel questioning the Islamic Republic's intentions and this deployment is no exception. Ahmadinejad has made no secret of his hatred for Israel "I think that today, we can see what an unstable region we live in, a region in which Iran tries to exploit the situation that has been created in order to expand its influence by passing warships through the Suez Canal," Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu told his cabinet on Sunday after first hearing of the deployment. Israel on Tuesday urged world powers to respond "firmly" with foreign ministry spokesman Yigal Palmor telling reporters that Iran threatened "an unprecedented military presence in the Mediterranean" and showed a new level of "defiance" that must be addressed by the international community. "Iran has surely calculated that this move will increase pressure on Israel and raise fears of regional instability and coming at this time, has made a conscious decision to pursue the move," Elizabeth Iskander said. "This move is potentially threatening but with Iran raising itself to the level of Israel with its alleged pursuit of an atomic bomb, and with Tehran's self-confidence soaring, threatening rhetoric is all these two sides have left," Gaub said. "It is a way of showing the other that there are no other options. It is unlikely that there will be military action between Israel and Iran." Author: Nick Amies Editor: Rob Mudge


Hamza bin Laden: Al Qaeda poster boy He has established himself as an al Qaeda leader. Now the United States has declared Osama bin Laden's son a "global terrorist." The few photos of Hamza bin Laden that are publicly available won't likely be of much help to investigators: They stem from the time around the turn of the millennium. At that time, the son of Osama bin Laden was 12 years old. The images show a serious, perhaps even threatening, young boy. Wearing a turban and a camouflage military vest, the youth reads a communique - a pose in which he already presents himself as a voice for al Qaeda. Other photos from the time show him in the driver's seat of an off-road vehicle with a bullet-riddled windshield or crouching on a stony plain with a machine gun in his hands. These photos document the young man's journey to jihad - a career that would eventually lead him to the highest ranks of international terrorism: In early January, the US State Department declared him an "international terrorist." It is a title once held by his father. Pictures of him are rare: Hamza bin Laden in earlier years In the eyes of al Qaeda strategists, his inclusion on the State Department list will no doubt raise Hamza bin Laden's credibility and authority within the organization. The title is seen as a badge of honor among jihadis. And, though hundreds of individuals are on the list, Hamza, as the son of Osama bin Laden, will certainly be a standout. Al Qaeda will undoubtedly be happy about the label: Hamza bin Laden is currently thought to be the most likely candidate to take over leadership of the terrorist network. After Osama bin Laden was killed by US special forces in the spring of 2011, his confidant, the Egyptian Ayman al-Zawahiri, became the voice and face of the group. However, al-Zawahiri, who was born in 1951, had none of the charisma of his predecessor. For that reason, it is thought that Osama's own charismatic son Hamza is destined to lead the organization. As the photos show, it is a role for which the young man was groomed early on. "His father took him by the hand from a young age," explains terrorism expert Peter Bergen, author of the book "United States of Jihad." "Hamza has been very much indoctrinated with the whole jihadi kind of message. He's a true believer. I think that makes him a concern." As he grew older, bin Laden became more involved in al Qaeda's activities. It is thought that he can be seen in a 2005 video of an attack on Pakistani security forces in the border region between Pakistan and Afghanistan. Osama bin Laden and Ayman al-Zawahiri, the present leader of al Qaeda Threatening messages Over the past few years, he has increasingly presented himself as a leading jihadi in al Qaeda. In August 2015 he released an audio message calling on his adherents to take the fight to Washington, London, Paris and Tel Aviv. In another audio message, from May, he spoke about the conflict in the Middle East and the war in Syria. The "blessed Syrian revolution" has made the "liberation" of Jerusalem more likely, he exclaimed. He went on to say that jihadis fighting there should join forces. "There is no longer an excuse for those who insist on division and disputes now that the whole world has mobilized against Muslims." That same month, al Qaeda boss al-Zawahiri announced that the young man had been admitted to the organization's leadership. Bin Laden released another audio message in July, proclaiming that "we are all Osama," and threatening the United States. In the message he announced that he would seek revenge for his father's killing. Further, he stated that his organization would respond to the "oppression of the people of Palestine, Afghanistan, Syria, Iraq, Yemen, Somalia and the rest of the Muslim lands that did not survive your oppression." Revenge for his father's death, he said, would not only be carried out in his name, but in the name "of all who defend Islam." Those public statements, released within such a short period of time, suggest that al Qaeda is seeking to intensify its recruiting efforts. Over the last several years the group has lost much of its attractiveness, as more and more young Islamists have turned to the so-called "Islamic State" (IS). Unlike al Qaeda, IS is putting its energy into establishing a caliphate, which it hopes to spread across the globe. In contrast, al Qaeda has much more modest aims. Al-Zawahiri's fighters are primarily concerned with ending the presence of Western, but especially US military forces in the Middle East. They see this as a prerequisite for establishing a just Islamic order in the region. As well, they are committed to fighting what they see as corrupt rulers, such as the Saudi royal family in Saudi Arabia. The propaganda of "Islamic State" is seductive to some young Muslims IS presents itself in a much more brutal fashion than al Qaedas. Although al Qaeda also decapitated prisoners, it never did so on the scale that IS has. IS has also made a name for itself through systematic rape and unbridled brutality. IS videos, which propagate this culture of brutality, have apparently also brought the group many new recruits. "One should not underestimate the power of these images," as French Islamist Mickaël Devredt, alias "Abu-Rayan," explained to terrorism researcher David Thomson. Today's generation of 18-to-20-year-olds is the first to have grown up with the internet. "And just imagine what effect they have on the mind of a person that has grown up with Islamism." Thus far, al Qaeda has offered little to counter the propaganda disseminated by IS. Hamza bin Laden's rise to the top of al Qaeda could be an attempt to change that.


Plastic bags become a weaver's paradise The old adage “One man’s trash is another man’s treasure” could be the motto for a project called, Reform Studio, which has found a novel use for plastic bags that fuses tradition and modernity. Mariam Hazem, one of the founders of Reform Studio, explains why she collects plastic bags: “Statistics show the number of plastic bags on the globe is growing by a million each minute." And indeed, a June 2012 report by the GIZ Society for International Cooperation and SWEEP-Net says plastic constitutes 11 percent of solid waste in the Middle East and North Africa.  Reform Studio is headquartered in El-Tagamo El-Khames, one of the more refined quarters of Cairo. Visitors are immediately struck by the unique, colorful seating arrangements. The “El-Qahwa” (‘the coffee’) chair collection has an authentically Egyptian coffee shop flair; the difference being that the seats are made of braided plastic bags rather than wood. The “Gramaz” set (derived from ‘grandmas’), on the other hand, is more modern, inspired by an old chair that used to belong to Mariam’s grandmother.  It takes 50 plastic bags to manufacture one chair for the “Ahwa” collection, a piece from the “Gramaz” collection requires three times as many. It all started with the revolution  The masterminds of Reform Studio are 25 year-olds Mariam Hazem and Hend Riad, who originally came up with the concept for their graduation project at the Faculty of Applied Arts at the German University in Cairo in 2014. Today, their idea has evolved into a brand, and their products are available at six stores in Cairo and one in London. Ancient technology has been repurposed in the name of waste management “After the onset of the revolution on January 25, 2011, we were highly motivated, we wanted to be part of the change,” says Hazem. “We wanted to find a solution to one of Egypt’s most serious issues: all-pervading trash."  So she and Riad researched the topic and talked to some trash men and scavengers around Cairo. When they found out that because plastic doesn't decompose, most people get rid of it by burning it, they developed a method to convert bags into long threads. These threads are then strung on a loom and manually woven into fabric, which is used to create chairs, bags and home accessories.  “It is more expensive to recycle plastic bags than it is to make them, which is why only a very small number of Egyptian companies recycle them”, Hend explains. Plastic that does get recycled is sometimes mixed up with hospital waste in the process, which means recycled products are of poor quality or even pose a health hazard. “That is why," he says, "the objective of our graduation project was not to recycle plastic bags, but to reuse them."  In a country, which according to Egyptian Ministry for the Environment statistics, only processes and reuses 9.5 percent of all its solid waste, it is a novel concept. Weaving is a skill that has lost popularity in our industrial age Promoting the idea of separating garbage, Reform Studio gets its plastic bags from two sources: from manufacturers who have flawed bags they would otherwise have to throw away and family and friends. By asking people they know to donate plastic bags, the entrepreneurs are raising awareness of the problem.  They also appeal to the public via the Reform Studio website to help collect bags, and every once in a while, they organize contests to raise awareness of the issue. In one such contest, workers at a concrete company were able to collect 4,000 bags within a week.  “Sadly, however,” says Riad, “we are currently unable to use any bags collected from landfills.” Many of these bags are in poor condition and cannot be made into threads. Cleaning and disinfecting is immensely costly. “But we are looking for a solution to sanitize such bags.”  The return of the loom  In their Reform Studio project, Mariam Hazem and Hend Riad are fusing two ideas: the new trend in upcycling and the ancient Egyptian tradition of the loom. Sometimes all it takes is a clear vision and a healthy dose of determination Weaving is a craft that goes all the way back to the time of the pharaohs, but as mechanization put many loom manufacturers out of business, skilled weavers are getting rare. “We hope our project will help revive the craft and put weavers back in work,” Hazem says.  In their own workshop, two weavers work three looms. Seventy percent of Reform Studio’s staff is female, and the project offers employment opportunities for untrained women – either at the workshop, or for those who are not in a position to leave the house for work, from home. These women are connected with Reform Studio by charitable organizations or associations and then trained for one week before they start working.  “From the outset, our goal was to make a product with an educational message,” says Riad. “In fact, our products have helped stir a discussion on how you can convert what some consider to be trash into something of value.” All the colors of the rainbow. The versatility of plastic Hard to imagine this started life as a collection of disposable plastic bags


Egypt police kill gang members linked to Italian student's death A Cairo gang that dresses as police officers and abducts foreigners has been implicated in the death of Italian Giulio Regeni. Authorities said four members were shot dead when they opened fire on security forces. Police in Cairo said on Thursday that they had identified suspects linked to the death of Italian student Giulio Regeni. This announcement came immediately on the heels of police shooting dead four gang members in an exchange of gunfire, only to find Regeni's bag at the home of one of their family members. "When they saw the police they fired at them. The police returned fire, resulting in their deaths," said the Egyptian Interior Ministry in a statement, adding that "Italian security has been has been notified about the results." The authorities said the gang was known for posing as police officers and abducting or robbing foreigners. The interior ministry released photos of Regeni's student ID card and passport that were discovered after the gunfight. 28-year-old Regeni, a Cambridge University graduate student, was found tortured and murdered in January. He had been in the Egyptian capital researching labor movements, a touchy topic since a 2011 revolution that has seen periods of varying political instability. He had written articles critical of the government of President Abdel-Fattah el-Sisi under a pseudonym. He vanished on January 25, the anniversary of the uprising, as police were out in droves to quell protests. He was last heard from entering a metro station as he went to meet a friend. The manner of Regeni's disappearance prompted accusations of the involvement of security services, something Cairo has consistently denied. es/jr (AFP, Reuters)


Independent journalist arrested in Egypt Hossam Bahgat has been arrested on charges of publishing false reports against the military. His detention has heightened fears over the state of free expression in Egypt. Hossam Bahgat, a prominent human rights advocate and journalist, was arrested in Egypt on Sunday, security officials said. According to Mada Masr, the website Bahgat writes for, the 37-year-old is being held on charges of publishing false information under a new law which has sparked intense fear over the future of press freedom in Egypt. "The arrest of Hossam Bahgat today is yet another nail in the coffin for freedom of expression in Egypt," said Amnesty International's Middle East and North Africa chief Philip Luther. "The Egyptian military cannot continue to consider itself above the law and immune from criticism," Luther added. The charges stem from an October report Bahgat filed about 26 military officers who had been convicted in a court martial for plotting a coup against the state. Security officials confirmed the arrest, saying Bahgat was given a summons last week to report for questioning on Sunday. Following the interrogation, he was arrested and transferred to the jurisdiction of the military prosecutor. Bahgat was also the founder of the independent organization the Egyptian Initiative for Personal Rights (EIPR). Human Rights Watch also condemned the incarceration of the "leading defender of civil rights and liberties in Egypt." Human rights groups have consistently accused Egyptian President Abdel Fattah al-Sisi of exploiting a fragile security situation in Egypt to revoke personal freedoms won in 2011 with the overthrow of former dictator Hosni Mubarak. Al-Sisi himself came to power when the democratically elected Islamist President Mohamed Morsi was deposed in 2013. Morsi, the first democratically elected head of state in Egyptian history, is now on death row for his role in a prison break during the 2011 revolution.


Five years on: Egypt after the Arab Spring Imprisoned journalists, terrorist attacks and a silenced opposition: Where is Egypt today ahead of the 5th anniversary of the Arab Spring? On July 3, 2013, two years after the beginning of the Arab Spring, Abdel Fattah el-Sissi, then head of Egypt's armed forces, arrested Islamist President Mohammad Morsi and suspended the constitution. Morsi, who was the first Egyptian president to be democratically elected, is a senior member of the Muslim Brotherhood. His presidency was brief and chaotic and his popular support eroded. One year after Morsi’s ouster, el-Sissi won the presidency with 97 percent of votes. He has since silenced the opposition, press and NGOs, banned the Muslim Brotherhood, and kidnapped and killed hundreds of demonstrators. His policies have been harsher than those of his predecessor. Has the Arab Spring damaged Egypt? Here are some answers. Free Press? If you're a journalist in Egypt having affiliations with a banned group or are part of the opposition, you'll likely land in jail. It's as easy as that. The number of journalists being imprisoned is at an all time high, according to a December 2015 report by the Committee to Protect Journalists (CPJ). Egypt currently has the highest number of journalists in jail (23, as of December 2015) worldwide. It comes second for the worst jailer of journalists after China. According to the CPJ, entire outlets like Al Jazeera and Anadolu, a Turkish news agency, were forced to close their offices in Egypt. President Abdel Fattah el-Sissi frequently claims that these controls and arrests are carried out in the name of "national security". When Egyptian investigative journalist Ismail Alexandrani was arrested in November 2015, Human Rights Watch (HRW) spoke about "a pattern of Egyptian security agencies arresting people whose writings don't conform to official views". The Egyptian President Abdel Fattah al-Sissi As a result, entire regions in Egypt remain under-reported or not reported at all. Next to nothing is known about the Sinai conflict between militant groups and Egyptian forces because journalists "attempting to cover news in the peninsula have been denied entry at military checkpoints" according to the CPJ. "Journalism is over in the Sinai. The only reporting we can do is [to] tell the army's story. Anything else is a prison wish," a veteran reporter said. Opposition Not just journalists experience severe curbs to their freedom of speech. Activists, human rights defenders and opposition members are also being targeted. An estimated 40,000 political detainees are said to be in Egyptians prisons. The majority of political activists are in jail, making it difficult for the remaining political groups to demonstrate on the fifth anniversary of the Arab Spring. Members of the April 6 pro-democracy movement were imprisoned as a security precaution ahead of the anniversary, which is on January 25. The organization Freedom for the Brave reports unlawful detentions, "black site" prisons, use of illegal judicial procedures and state torture. The Egyptian online magazine Mada Masr published a list of Egyptians who aren't in jail this week ("pretty much everyone accused of killing protesters"), suggesting that it's easier to track who is walking on the streets freely. Muslim Brotherhood When then-President Morsi was removed from office, the Muslim Brotherhood was declared a terrorist organization. The government claimed that the Brotherhood carried out numerous assassinations, bombings and torture. When Deputy Prime Minister, Hossam Eisa, listed these events on television in December 2013, he provided no evidence. Now, most of the journalists and political detainees who are in prison have actually been charged with belonging to the Brotherhood. Human Rights Watch called the ban "politically driven" and called for the decision to be reversed promptly: "Since Morsi's ouster in July 2013, the authorities have killed more than 1,000 pro-Muslim Brotherhood protesters; arrested thousands of its supporters, including the majority of its leadership; and engaged in a systematic media campaign to demonize the group." The Sinai peninsula borders the Gaza Strip. Egypt's security forces are fighting militants linked to IS there. Terrorism in Sinai There is no transparency about what is happening in Sinai due to the lack of media coverage. What we know is that Egypt's security forces are fighting militants linked to 'Islamic State' (IS) in the Sinai peninsula, which borders the Gaza Strip. Since July, at least 238 members of the security forces have been killed there. IS claimed responsibility for the downing of a Russian plane and the deaths of 224 people on board in October 2015. Egypt, however, says that there is "no evidence" for a terror attack. As Egyptian security forces are increasingly being targeted by terrorist groups, Egyptian authorities began demolishing buildings and evicting people from their homes in July 2013. The official aim was to stop the smuggling of goods and weapons between the town of Rafah and the Gaza Strip. By August 2015, at least 3,255 residential, commercial, administrative, and community buildings had been destroyed in North Sinai according to Human Rights Watch. The organization also claims that more than 3,200 families were forced to leave their homes. The Egyptian military "began clearing the area" after an attack on a military checkpoint in North Sinai that left 33 soldiers dead. Human Rights Watch criticized that the government didn't use technology to detect and destroy smuggling tunnels used by terrorists and instead "wiped out" entire neighborhoods: "The Egyptian authorities have offered little or no evidence to support this justification, failed to observe international law protections for residents facing forced eviction, and may have violated the laws of war by disproportionately destroying thousands of homes in their effort to close smuggling tunnels [to the Gaza Strip]." Has Egypt lost the human rights gains from the Arab Spring? Any leftovers of the Arab Spring? According to Human Rights Watch, President Abdel Fattah el-Sissi is responsible for a "reversal of the human rights gains that followed the 2011 uprising." Because of multiple targeted efforts against dissidents, Egyptian activists talk about the biggest repression in history of organizations, campaigners and bloggers - which may or may not be triggered by the government's fear of the fifth anniversary of the revolution. Cairo's Townhouse Gallery, one of the country's most important and treasured cultural and intellectual institutions was been stormed by 20 members of the security forces and closed without an official reason.  Merit, a publishing house that promotes anti-censorship and freedom of speech and supports young voices in particular, has also been raided. The official reason is that Merit operated without a license and sold unregistered books. Merit's office in downtown Cairo famously functioned "as a haven for protesters" during the 18 days of the 2011 revolution. The founder, Mohamed Hashem, told Mada Masr: "If they want to scare us because of the noise we cause for them, we will continue to be noisy." Eric Trager wrote in Politico that while the "activists' revolutionary dreams were never realized, Egypt's state broke down further, and remains quite broken today. As a result of this experience, many Egyptians are so fearful of change that they are now content to live with their broken state, since they view it as preferable to further collapse." The Egyptian Foreign Minister Sameh Shoukry will be questioned by DW's Tim Sebastian on January 20. What about the economy?  Egypt's unemployment rate is currently at 12.7 percent (35 percent for the under-25s), the country is battling with high budget deficits, yet Mr. el-Sissi is still carrying out several big investments like building a new city in the desert or creating a new branch of the Suez Canal. He has obtained expensive arms which are of little use in Sinai, but can come in handy for intervention abroad in Libya or Yemen, according to The Economist. Egypt's tourism sector is almost completely ruined since the ousting of the dictator Mubarak. Three tourists were injured in a knife attack at a hotel resort in Hurghada in early January, just one of several IS-claimed attacks. For the millions of Egyptians who used to make a living from tourism, the future looks bleak until tourists' confidence in the country's security situation is restored.


Iran's 'blogfather': Why social media is killing the free web Pioneering Iranian blogger Hossein Derakhshan spent six years in prison for his work. He was disappointed by how trivial the internet had become upon his release. He told DW why. Hossein Derakhshan was born in Iran in 1975. In 2001, he went to study in Toronto, Canada. There, he started blogging under the pen name Hoder and translated a guide on how to blog in Farsi, initiating a Persian blogging surge. In 2004, Iran was among the top five countries with the most bloggers worldwide. These bloggers were living dangerously, however. Derakhshan was imprisoned by the Iranian government in 2008 and kept in prison for six years. Since 2015, Derakhshan, now living in Teheran, has been writing essays and giving talks about the impact of social media and the decline of online political exchanges. DW: Mr. Derakhshan, you spent six years offline while you were imprisoned. The internet changed tremendously during that period. What did you notice when you were released? Hossein Derakhshan: I observed a shift from an internet which was very decentralized, diverse, link-based, connected, curious, outward-looking and text-centered to a space which is image-centered, which is more about entertainment than discussions or debates or thinking. It is quite centralized and it's dominated by social networks. It's much less diverse. It is more about entertainment now. It has less serious content - including politics. What happened to all the bloggers you were working with? Many of the former bloggers and activists are co-opted in that new space; they actually seem to have forgotten that politics played a big role in their life at some point. Now they are happy with the little things they see on social networks. But I think there are less and less people who are interested in serious news and serious discussions. [Eds.: Many Iranian activists and bloggers were imprisoned - like Derakhshan - and have not been released.] When the internet emerged in the 90s, it created a new window of opportunity for serious discussion. After 20 years, this window is now closing, and the internet is becoming like television. It is actually forming a new kind of television which is internet-based and personalized and it is available on all kinds of devices. I am just very sad that everyone is into videos now rather than reading, because video is a limited medium for conveying complex messages. It simplifies everything and it is the most convenient environment for the rise of demagogues and populists. Social media may have helped the Egyptian revolution of 2011 at the beginning, but their success was limited, says Derakhshan Do you believe social networks aren't useful at all? After all, noteworthy political movements rallied through social networks over the last years… Social networks may be useful to have emotional reactions to certain news or certain events. Maybe even to bring people to the streets in some cases. But as an Egyptian activist has brilliantly put it, this has not helped the Egyptian revolution. Social networks were successful in bringing out people and giving them a negative voice about the status quo, but that did not lead to anything positive. They started to fight each other. Once the Mubarak regime was gone, the same social networks became the best device to foment internal rivalries and differences. So I think that as much as they can help people to organize against something, they cannot unite people in doing something positive, because they can not replace leadership. How did you see this development in Iran? Like everywhere else in the world, there are less people interested in reading more than a few paragraphs and you can see that in Iran as well, through the very very low circulation of books and newspapers and the sales for anything that is printed. It is going down very rapidly. At the same time, there is a huge rise in the number of people using some sort of social network, for instance Instagram is extremely popular in Iran. There is also this messaging application called Telegram which is extremely popular in Iran. I think more than 25 million people in Iran are using it now. This is completely different from how things were 10 years ago when there was a lot more text and reading and serious discussion going on. So much of the stuff on the web has been abandoned, many people used to have their own domain names, but they let them expire. It has become a graveyard. In the best cases, you have some tombs saying there used to be blogs here. Hossein Derakhshan, known as Hoder, was at the center of the blogging revolution in Iran Don't you use any social networks at all? I use Twitter because relatively speaking it is much more open. It supports hyperlinks and it can be very informative and useful to link to other places, to introduce and share ideas and articles. But generally speaking, there is a trend towards videos. Even Twitter as a text-based platform is going towards video and they are encouraging more live videos. What should happen to save the internet you knew and appreciated? We have to do certain things to disrupt this algorithm-based kind of gate keeping, which is creating comfort zones for everyone. I don't necessarily know what the solutions are because I think it is a very general problem and it can probably only be solved by big social structures like states. On an individual level, we can't do much but be unhappy about how things are changing. Still, we can push governments to intervene if they value representative democracy and informed citizenship and informed political participation. 


10 things you should know about the Berlinale Richard Gere and Penélope Cruz will be there, and you can watch a new TV series about a fictional, Nazi-run Britain. From stars and prizes to politics, here's everything you need to know about the Berlinale. 1. How many films are being shown? The 67th Berlinale, which runs from February 9-12, 2017, presents a total of 399 films. The number of showing is much higher as many of those films are being shown multiple times. Over one quarter of the films on the agenda were directed by women. 2. Is there one overarching theme? No. There are several themes that dominate the various programs. Some of them focus on the fate of refugees, such as the in-competition contribution of Finnish filmmaker Aki Kaurismäki, "The Other Side of Hope." Also this year, the Berlinale, in keeping with its long tradition of focusing on political topics, is presenting numerous documentaries. As 2017 is the 100th anniversary of the October Revolution, some of the contributions deal with political utopias. The section "Panorama" shows films on homosexuality, as well as African films and films dealing with racism. Aki Kaurismäki's "The Other Side of Hope" is vying for a Gold Bear Even though it's been all over the news, the name "Donald Trump" wasn't mentioned at all during the Berlinale's opening press conference. "Our program in itself is already a strong form of protest," responded Berlinale director Dieter Kosslick when asked how the festival would be responding to the new US president. 3. Which stars will be there? This year, Hollywood actors including Richard Gere and Ethan Hawke, Cillian Murphy and Robert Pattinson will be making appearances. The female stars that've marked Berlinale in their calendars tend to be from Europe, such as Cécile de France, Penélope Cruz, Catherine Deneuve and Kristin Scott Thomas. Australian stars Geoffrey Rush and Hugh Jackman, as well as German actors Nina Hoss, Moritz Bleibtreu, August Diehl, Bruno Ganz and Hanna Schygulla are also expected. 4. Which German films are being shown? This year, German films are strongly represented with 104 works shown in various program sections, as well as three films in competition by Volker Schlöndorff, Thomas Arslan and Andres Veiel. In addition, young German filmmakers will be shown exclusively in the series "Perspektive Deutsches Kino" (Perspective on German film). Thirty-six German films will run in the section "Lola" which caters to foreign film distributors. 5. Which international highlights can be expected? Expectations are high for some films in the competition including works by Aki Kaurismäki (Finland), Agnieszka Holland (Poland,) Sally Potter (Britain,) Hong Sangsoo (South Korea) and Alex de la Iglesia (Spain,) as well as US filmmakers James Mangold and Oren Moverman. Josef Hader appears in his own film, "Wild Mouse" Also drawing a lot of attention are two films directed by actors, namely American Stanley Tucci and Austrian Josef Hader. The works of big-name directors will be shown in other sections, including James Gray, Raoul Peck, Fernando Trueba, Bruce LaBruce and Romuald Karmakar. The Berlinale also offers a platform to new discoveries and lesser-known filmmakers that have promising careers ahead of them. 6. Which program series are particularly important? In addition to the competition and the well-established series "Panorama" and "Forum," the section "Generation" tends to draw crowds. Many Berlinale fans love this part of the festival as it's directed towards very young audiences. But there's also something in store adults. The section "NATIVe" shows films focusing on indigenous peoples in northern Europe. "Kulinarisches Kino" (Culinary cinema) not only shows works on food and the environment, but also invites audiences to actually sit down and enjoy a real bite. Finally, the "Berlinale Shorts" fascinates short film fans. 7. What does the Berlinale contribute to cinema history? Traditionally, the Berlinale also takes a look back at the past. This time, the historical retrospective is devoted to the science-fiction genre with both well-known newer films from Eastern Europe and Asia. The series "Berlinale Classics" presents restored historical works that haven't been viewable in original for a long time, among them Helmut Käutner's "Schwarzer Kies" (Black gravel) and the Mexican film "Canoa." The digitally upgraded zombie classic "Night of the Living Dead" is likely to give viewers the creeps this year. 8. Does the film festival also present TV series? The awards will be presented on Saturday, February 18 Yes, watching entire series has become a tradition at the Berlinale. This year, viewers can look forward to "4 Blocks" by Marvin Kren featuring Berlin's drug and clan scene, as well as "SS-GB" by Philipp Kadelbach, which is set in a fictional Britain where the Nazis were victorious. Historical film fans can enjoy Rainer Werner Fassbinder's innovative 1972 TV series "Eight Hours Are Not a Day" in its restored version. 9. Where are the films shown? Throughout the entire city. The festival's focal point is Potsdamer Platz, where the in-competition films are shown every evening. Other traditional locations are old movie theaters like Zoopalast and Delphi in the western part of the city. The "Berlinale Goes Kiez" section brings movies to local Berlin neighborhood cinemas. 10. Which awards can be won? Golden and Silver Bears will be handed out to the competition winners on February 18. Since 2006, the GFF Best First Feature Award, endowed with 50,00 euros, has been presented to a promising newcomer each year. Starting this year, there is yet another new award aimed at producers and directors of documentaries, the "Glashütte Original Documentary Award. There are additional awards handed out to films in some particular sections, like the Teddy in the "Panorama" section, which goes to a gay/lesbian film. This year, the Italian costume designer Milena Canonero, who became known by her work with Stanley Kubrick, will receive the Honorary Golden Bear. The Berlinale Camera 2017 goes to Chinese film distributor Nansun Shi, Australian actor Geoffrey Rush, and Egyptian film critic Samir Farid. 


No German apology for Al-Jazeera's Mansour Berlin will conduct reforms to prevent incidents similar to the arrest of Ahmed Mansour, who spent two days in custody at Egypt's request. While expressing "regret," German government stopped short of full apology. Cases similar to the one of Al-Jazeera journalist Ahmed Mansour will be checked on a "higher level" in the future, German Foreign Ministry spokesman Martin Schäfer announced Wednesday. In addition, both the German Foreign and Justice ministries are to change the internal regulations, to ensure that such incidents would not be repeated. "Maybe we could have spared Mr. Mansour two days in detention. We regret it," Schäfer said. However, there will be no official apology for the Al-Jazeera reporter who was arrested Saturday at Berlin Tegel Airport on a warrant initiated from Cairo. German officials released Mansour two days later, following a massive controversy and protests held by human rights activists and freedom of expression groups. Egyptian regime 'exporting' dictatorship Mansour, who holds both British and Egyptian citizenship, was convicted in absentia by and Egyptian court for allegedly taking part in the torture of a lawyer in 2011 in Tahrir Square during the Egyptian revolution. He and Qatar-based Al-Jazeera denounced the accusations as "absurd." Mansour returned to Qatar on Tuesday. In Doha, he expressed suspicion that his arrest was connected to the diplomatic trip by Egyptian President Abdel-Fattah el-Sissi, who visited Germany earlier in June. "I fear that the Sissi regime - the dictatorial regime, the tyrannical regime - was successful in perhaps exporting ... its dictatorship to Germany," Mansour said Tuesday. Activists urging MP's for answers On Wednesday, Foreign Ministry spokesman Schäfer denied the claims that Egyptian government influenced the German judiciary, saying that there was no contact between the two concerning Mansour's arrest. Human Rights Watch called on German lawmakers on Wednesday to put pressure on their government to get answers and "make sure that proper safeguards are in place to make sure that nothing like this happens again," said Wenzel Michalski, HRW's director for Germany. dj/sms (EPD, AFP, dpa)


'Legal support, moral support and professional support' Egypt is now the world's second worst jailer of journalists - surpassed only by China. The situation is especially bad for women, who are at risk of physical and/or sexual assault in the staunchly patriarchal society. Shahira Amin is an Egyptian journalist. As a news anchor for the state-owned Nile TV, Amin made international headlines in 2011, when she walked off the job to protest what she said was political interference in the news organization's coverage of the pro-democracy revolution. She has also been a contributor to CNN's "Inside Africa" program. Now Amin helps run the Union of Media Women in Egypt, a nongovernmental organization dedicated to training and supporting female journalists. The following is a condensed version of an interview with Amin. Deutsche Welle: What does the Union of Media Women in Egypt do? Egyptian journalist Shahira Amin Shahira Amin: When we started out, it was a mentoring program, but we've expanded, and it's a support network for women journalists. We give them legal support, moral support and professional support. We partner with various organizations to be able to give them this support. How many members are there? We have 1,000 journalist members and young volunteers who come and help us with the training sessions, about 30 volunteers. Do the members pay dues? So far it has been free, but we're looking for ways to sustain the organization because we don't only do the training in Cairo. We travel to the provinces, where the journalists have very little access to training opportunities. What kind of legal help do you provide? Egypt is now the second biggest jailer of journalists after China. It is a difficult situation for journalists, but women have it worse. They are subjected to sexual assaults to keep them out of the public space. The attacks are systematic, and some of them are pretty bad: You can call them rapes. We can't just provide this legal help ourselves, so we have partnered with legal organizations, and their lawyers are willing to do this for us free of charge. Why is Egyptian society so uncomfortable with women in the role of journalists? Because it's a patriarchal, conservative society. I have spoken to women working as journalists outside of Cairo, and they can't even tell their families they are working as journalists. So, when they write it is under the condition of anonymity. The family would raise their eyebrows and say: "What, you want to stay out late? You want to talk to men? You want to travel?" This is unacceptable in the conservative community. So, a lot of women aren't able to say "I'm a journalist." How difficult is it to be a journalist in Egypt - for men or women? Under (former strongman Hosni) Mubarak, there was censorship and the state used the media as a propaganda machine for the regime. Lots of media organizations came after the revolution, but they all belong to wealthy businessmen that have links with the regime. In fact, they are more a propaganda tool than state television right now. Are there any independent journalists in Egypt trying to get at the truth? There are a few, but very few. But it's the young ones leading the way now. When 17 editors of privately owned media signed a pledge of allegiance to the government saying that they would refrain from criticizing the police, the judiciary and the military - because it's not the right time, because we are at war with terrorism - the young editors signed another pledge, saying: "This is not journalism. Sorry, we will not obey this." There were scores of them. They are the hope for the future. So what happened? The young editors said: "We were taught to hold the government accountable. We will continue to practice journalism they way it should be." I think they embarrassed the top editors. But the top editors always say, "If you are not with the state you are a traitor." The young editors were not fired, but were harassed at work. Is the situation worse now for journalists than under Mubarak? I would say it's worse because, under Mubarak, there were very, very few journalists that were jailed. Just last week there was a death sentence for two journalists. But I believe there are between 20 and 40 journalists in jail. Some have gotten a life sentence, and this is for doing their work. Then there is the famous case of Shawkan (Mahmoud Abou Zeid), a photojournalist who was taking pictures when the police tried to disperse a pro-Morsi (deposed President Mohammed Morsi) sit-in. He's been in jail since August 2014, in pretrial detention. That's over two years in pretrial detention, and that's against the constitution. He has not been formally charged - and all he was doing was his job. Permalink http://p.dw.com/p/1AOQO You were recently honored in Germany for your work in Egypt. What was that about? This award was the Responsible Leaders Award 2016, an annual competition organized by the BMW Foundation in Germany. I came to Berlin two months ago to present our initiatives before a jury commission, to explain what the journalist union does. And, when I got home, I got an email saying we had won the competition. So, last week I was in Munich, receiving the award with four of our board members. It's a monetary award, but we took it together with Chile, for another initiative about waste management. So, we split the award which is $30,000 each. What do you hope to do with the money? It will make it easier for us to move around the country. We had to cancel a training session in Luxor because we were not able to afford the trip or the accommodation. Now we can move easier around the country in the parts where it is needed most. But also we can buy our own equipment for the practical training. Before, we had to hire cameras and studios; this will go a long way in helping our work.


Egypt marks fifth anniversary of pro-democracy uprising in muted fashion Egypt has marked the fifth anniversary of a pro-democracy uprising that toppled President Hosni Mubarak. Amid raised security, there was a ban on any demonstrations not approved by police. The run-up to the anniversary saw heightened security in the capital, Cairo, as well as a wave of arrests and security checks. Thousands of police were deployed outside security offices, police stations and other public buildings, including the state television headquarters. Meanwhile, riot police were in place around the city's Tahrir Square - the focal point of the 2011 uprising. Demonstrations not approved by police were banned, and a group of protesters gathered in the square to praise security services for their actions after the revolt. In a speech last month, President Abdel-Fattah el-Sissi, a former general, warned against any demonstration to mark January 25 - designated "Revolution Day" a year after the demonstrations began. Last year, at least 15 people died in unrest on the anniversary. The raised security comes amid a growing escalation of an Islamist insurgency in northern Sinai by fighters aligned with the "Islamic State" (IS) militant group. Divisive Islamist rule The first democratic elections after the revolt saw the emergence of Egypt's oldest Islamist movement, the Muslim Brotherhood, which was able to dominate parliament. The Brotherhood's Mohammed Morsi became the country's first directly-elected president, but his rule proved divisive. Morsi was overthrown in July 2013 in a coup spearheaded by army chief Sissi, who was later installed as president. 'Shattered hopes'  A new parliament, inaugurated earlier this month, is dominated by pro-Sissi lawmakers and is thought to be unlikely to pose any challenge to his rule. "The hopes that the '25 January Revolution' would herald a new era of reforms and respect for human rights have been truly shattered. Egyptians have been made to watch as their country reverts back to a police state," said Said Boumedouha, Amnesty International's Deputy Middle East and North Africa Programme Director. Early on Monday, two people were reported to have died in a police swoop on suspected militants in 6th of October City, a suburb of Cairo. Egypt's official MENA news agency said firearms and explosives were found at the raided property. rc/msh (AFP, AP, dpa, Reuters)


Egypt overturns policeman's conviction for activist's death The Court of Cassation in Cairo has annulled the guilty verdict of an officer charged with causing the death of a protester. The man was one of only several people convicted in the murders of hundreds of demonstrators. Egypt's highest court on Sunday reversed a 15-year jail term handed down to a policeman who had been convicted of shooting a female activist dead in the street. First Lieutenant Yaseen Hatem, 23, was initially charged in March 2015 for "battery that led to [the] death" of Shaima al-Sabbagh, a lesser charge than murder. Sabbagh was hit by birdshot in January of last year while participating in a small march on the eve of the fourth anniversary of the revolution that brought down longtime President Hosni Mubarak. Marchers were in the process of bringing a wreath to Cairo's Tahrir Square to mark the event when police attempted to disperse them with the birdshot. Her death sparked international outrage, particularly since part of the incident was caught on film and quickly spread across social media. The outcry prompted President Abdel Fattah al-Sisi to demand that the authorities bring her killer to justice. Hatem's trial was a rare instance of police facing the court for harming demonstrators, and most have been directly acquitted. Rights groups: Police act with impunity On Sunday, the Court of Cassation sided with Hatem in an appeal and ordered a retrial. "It just proves that my client was innocent from the start," his lawyer, Gamil Sayid, told French news agency AFP, adding that Hatem would soon be freed. Human rights organizations have consistently accused the Egyptian police of acting with impunity against protesters, particularly supporters of ousted Islamist President Mohammed Morsi. A crackdown against pro-Morsi activists under Sisi's rule has seen thousands jailed and hundreds sentenced to death for ties to the now banned Muslim Brotherhood. es/jlw (AFP, Reuters)


Obama unblocks military aid for Egypt President Obama has approved sending twelve fighter jets, 20 Harpoon missiles and 125 tank kits to Egypt, the White House has said. The military aid had been suspended after the army seized power in Cairo in 2013. Washington decided to release the military equipment in an effort to help Egyptian forces in their fight against extremist threats in the country's turbulent region. Egypt currently plays a key role in the Arab offensive against Houthi rebels in Yemen, and is active in combat against the "Islamic State" in Libya. The US froze some $650 million in military aid after the Egyptian army ousted Islamist President Mohammed Morsi in July 2013. El-Sisi's government, which took over a year later, has been sharply criticized for its violent crackdown on dissent, with activists accusing the new regime of being more repressive than the longtime Egyptian dictator Hosni Mubarak, toppled in the 2011 revolution. More money for border security The White House said it is not issuing a certificate that Egypt has made progress toward democracy, which was one of the possible paths towards lifting the block. Instead, the US maintains the aid to Cairo is in the interests of its own national security. The US will also target its aid toward equipment used for counterterrorism, border and maritime security, and for sustaining weapons systems already in use by Egypt, the White House said. "In this way, we will ensure that US funding is being used to promote shared objectives in the region, including a secure and stable Egypt and the defeat of terrorist organizations," spokeswoman for the White House National Security Council, Bernadette Meehan, said in a statement. dj/bk (AP, AFP, dpa)


'Cultures are not all equal,' writes Australia's former PM Abbott Australians should stop apologizing for their Western values, Australia's recently-deposed prime minister, Tony Abbott, has written in a newspaper. His opponents accused him of trying to "Trumpify" the nation's politics. The West should be "ready to proclaim the clear superiority of our culture to one that justifies killing people in the name of God," Abbot said in the opinion piece for the Wednesday edition of Sydney Daily Telegraph, speaking out against extremist factions in the Muslim faith. "We can't remain in denial about the massive problem within Islam," the former prime minister added. The religion needs to "delegitimize the urge to 'behead all who insult the Prophet' but only Muslims can do this," according to Abbott. People should encourage Muslims to "reclaim their faith from the zealots," he added. 'Religious revolution' In an interview with Sky TV on Wednesday, the center-right politician also said that all "cultures are not equal." "We've got to work closely with live-and-let-live Muslims because there needs to be - as (Egyptian) President el-Sissi has said - there needs to be a religious revolution inside Islam," Abbott said. This is Abbott's first public interview since Malcolm Turnbull, a member of Abbott's Liberal party, ousted him in a coup three months ago. Struggle with terrorism Turnbull said that Abbott was entitled to his opinion, but stressed that vast majority of Muslims rejected violent extremism. "The one thing we need to be very careful not to do, and I'm sure Tony agrees with this, what we must not do is play into the hands of our enemies and seek to tag all Muslims with responsibility for the crimes of a few," he said. An oppostion Labor MP, Ed Husic, decried Abbott's "effort to Trumpify Australian politics," referring to the controversial US presidential candidate Donald Trump. Australian Human Rights Commission chief Gillian Triggs also warned against blanket assertions about Islam or Australian Muslims. "Many of those (Muslims) I meet in my job, I know them to be really remarkably peaceable and good family people. So I think we need to work on understanding why that tiny number ... has become so radicalized," she said. Australia has seen several terror attacks on its soil since late last year, when an Iranian-born self-proclaimed "cleric" killed two people during a 17- hour siege in Sydney. A 15-year-old boy also gunned down an employee at Sydney police headquarters in October. The security forces foiled at least six more attacks during the last 12 months, authorities say. dj/msh (AFP, dpa)


Report: Egypt's ousted President Morsi refusing prison food Egypt's state-run media has reported that ousted President Mohammed Morsi has been refusing to eat prison food because he believes it is unsafe. Morsi was sentenced to death in May. Egypt's ousted Islamist President Mohammed Morsi reportedly requested permission to receive outside food, according to reports from Egypt's state-run MENA news agency. The Associated Press quoted MENA reports saying that Morsi had described the prison food as "a crime committed against his rights" at a court hearing on Saturday. Hypoglycemia and diabetes Qatar-based news channel Al Jazeera backed up the report, quoting Morsi's son Osama saying his father had suspected that his food had been tampered with, leading him to fear for his life. He added that Morsi suffered from hypoglycemia (low levels of blood sugar). The MENA news agency said that the former president was diabetic, which could lead to health issues with his blood sugar levels. Morsi has reportedly also requested to meet with a medical team. Morsi, former leader of the Freedom and Justice Party, affiliated to the Muslim Brotherhood, and Egypt's first democratically elected president, was overthrown by the military in 2013. ss/bk (AP, MENA)


What's On at Europe's Musuems The origins of cubism; the life and times of the Egyptian pharaohs; and what happened when Pop Art grew up Ferrara  goes Cubist Palazzo dei Diamanti,  Ferrara Legend has it that an art critic in the early 20th century dismissively described Georges Braque's work as "bizarreries cubiques", thereby unwittingly coining the term "cubist". It was a movement that began in 1907, with Picasso's famous  Les Demoiselles d'Avignon. A major exhibition in Ferrara has now brought together numerous works by Cubist painters in a show called  Cubism: Revolution and Tradition at the Palazzo dei Diamanti. In chronological order, it covers work by Picasso, Braque, Léger, Gris, Mondrian, Gleizes, Metzinger, Severini, Marcoussis and Diego Rivera. Cubism: Revolution and Tradition runs through January 9, 2005. The exhibition is open Sun.-Thur. 9:00 - 20:00, Fri.-Sat. 9:00 - 24:00 France  welcomes the Pharaohs Institut du Monde Arab, Paris The Paris Institute of the Arab World is currently hosting an exhibition devoted to pharaohs. Of the 200 or so pharaohs on show, more than half have been loaned by the Cairo Museum and date from between 1550 - 1069 BC. Many are on exhibit in France for the first time, such as a three-meter-high statue of Tutenkamun. Kings and warriors, the Egyptian rulers fulfilled a range of functions. "This exhibition is designed to show the different facets of the pharaohs' identity", explained the museum director.  Pharaoh runs through April 10, 2005. The exhibition is open Tue. - Sun. 10:00 - 18:00 An American in  Paris Musée d'Orsay, Paris After turning his back on conventional photography, Alfred Stieglitz, husband of Georgia O'Keefe, founded the Photo Secession group in 1902 and began publishing the magazine "Camera Work". The Musée d'Orsay was one of the only European galleries the Georgia O'Keefe Foundation donated part of its collection to, and the current show comprises some 400 pieces by the son of German immigrants, who died in New York in 1946. Alfred Stieglitz runs from Oct. 19 - Jan. 16, 2005. the exhibition is open Tue.-Sun. 10:00 -18:00, Thur. 10:00 - 21:45 and Sun. from 9:00  What the eye can see Atelier  Augarten  ,  Austria Austrian artist Valie Export's work explores universal themes such as perception, communication and man's relationship to his environment. The Galerie Belvedere is now presenting a show with the title "Valie Export: Series", which includes 90 photographs, installations, videos and graphics by the 64-year-old artist. Her technique is to divide motifs into individual images taken from the same position as a means of illustrating how the human eye responds to what it sees. Valie Export: Series runs through February 20, 2005 and is open Tue.-Sun. 10:00 - 18:00  What Pop Art Did Next IVAM,  Valencia Jasper Johns was one of the pioneers of Pop Art, best-known for his flag, target and number paintings. His painted bronze statues brought him his international breakthrough in the 1950s, but it's Johns' later work that's now on show in Valencia's Institute for Modern Art. The collection of some 90 graphics, drawings and paintings date from the period 1983 to 2003. Born in 1930 in Georgia, USA, Johns was a close friend of Robert Rauschenberg, and his work drew on work by artists as diverse as Frida Kahlo, Paul Cézanne, Pablo Picasso, Marcel Duchamp, Holbein and Matthias Grünewald. Things of the Past and Present runs through Jan. 2, 2005 and is open Tue. - Sun. 10:00 - 20:00


Ibrahim, Mohamed


Al-Jazeera journalist arrested in Berlin German federal police have said one of Al-Jazeera's journalists has been arrested at Berlin's Tegel Airport on an international warrant initiated by Egypt. Ahmed Mansour had been on his way to Qatar. Ahmed Mansour, who has dual Egyptian and British citizenship and is presenter on Al-Jazeera Arabic, was sentenced last year in absentia to 15 years in prison by a Cairo court. The German news agency DPA, quoting federal police on Saturday, reported that the international arrest warrant concerned several unspecified alleged offences. Al-Jazeera in a press release Saturday said Mansour had told it by phone that he would remain in custody until Monday when he would face a German judge who would decide on his case. Mansour had rejected the charges as absurd, it said. Last October, Al-Jazeera in a press release said it denied Egypt's charge that Mansour had "tortured" a lawyer in Tahrir Square during Egypt's revolution in 2011. The Qatari-based television channel said it was "paying the price for its professionalism" amid strains between Egypt and the Gulf state. It said Mansour had been "targeted with more than 150 false accusations and complaints by Egyptian authorities." 'Very serious development' Reuters broke news of Mansour's arrest and quoted international lawyer Saad Djebbar as saying, "This is a very serious development." "We knew that the Egyptians were going to set such a trap to harass our journalists and this is what has happened," said Djebbar. He added that Mansour was arrested at Tegel as he tried to board a Qatar Airways flight from Berlin to Doha, Qatar's capital. Cairo has previously accused Qatar of backing the now-banned Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt. The movement was toppled in 2013 by Abdel Fattah el-Sissi, Egypt's military chief turned elected president. El-Sissi visited German Chancellor Angela Merkel in Berlin on an official visit earlier this month. Rights groups urged Merkel to press him to end "the gravest human rights crisis in Egypt in decades." 'Misunderstanding' Al-Jazeera quoted Mansour in its press release on Saturday as saying: "I am now in detention in berlin airport [sic] in Germany as I was heading back to Doha." "We hope that this misunderstanding will be resolved quickly, he said. "It is quite ludicrous that a country like Germany would enforce and support such a request made by a dictatorial regime like the one we have in Egypt," Mansour said. "The Interpol itself cleared my name with this document that I have in my hands," he added. Two still awaiting retrial outcome In February, Egypt released Al-Jazeera journalist Peter Greste, an Australian national, after 400 days in prison on charges of aiding the Brotherhood. Fahmy and Mahmoud face retrial Two other Al-Jazeera journalists, Egyptian Baher Mohamed and Mohamed Fahmy, a naturalized Canadian, were released on bail in February in Egypt, pending a retrial outcome due on June 25. They denied the charges leveled against them. Last month, Fahmy's lawyer filed a lawsuit in a Canadian court, accusing his employer of negligence. Al-Jazeera said it was saddened by Fahmy's move. ipj/sms (dpa, Reuters, AFP)


Tackling sexual harassment in Egypt Nihal Saad Zaghloul saw her friend sexually assaulted in the middle of Egypt’s Tahrir Square and was unable to help. Farid Farid reports from Cairo on a new campaign to combat such attacks against women. "It was the time when there were a lot of attacks in Tahrir Square, a lot of sexual assaults there and one of those assaults happened to a friend of mine, in front of me, so it got really personal," Nihal Saad Zaghloul told DW. Zaghloul was also sexually harassed that day in June 2012 by a mob of men motivating her later to co-found Bassma, an organization dedicated toward fighting sexual violence in public space. Meaning imprint in Arabic, the group has been leaving its mark in one of Cairo's busiest public spaces - metro stations. Cairo is one of the world's most congested cities and with relatively low prices for public transport millions use the metro. "Initially we thought about doing a regular public campaign distributing a booklet with these comic strips in the metro stations or in universities. When we tried to get clearance from the transport authorities, we were denied it," Zaghloul explained. Leaving a mark To capitalize on this foot traffic and get around the bureaucracy, Bassma commissioned artist Ahmed Nady to create comic strips depicting everyday incidents of sexual harassment in Egypt and then bought large ad spaces in one of the main stations to raise awareness about the issue in a novel way. Zaghloul maintains that reception has been positive so far but noted that it will take years before hardened attitudes that blame women for their actions shift. "A few men have written on the white spaces of the comics statements such as 'let women dress modestly or let women be veiled and nobody will get harassed.' You find that those men that say women should be veiled are themselves the ones that harass veiled women!" She recounted that during this year's Eid, marking the end of Ramadan, as part of Bassma's efforts to protect women from attacks, she confronted a group of men who were harassing women and was met with bizarre explanations for their behavior. "They tell me 'I have to try. I have to harass her to see whether she will go out with me.' They will come up with excuses such as she was laughing too loud or she had locks of her hair out of the veil, she looked at me and smiled. They will come up with anything to justify their actions," she added. Timely campaign The campaign could not have been timelier as Reham Saeed, a controversial television host, last week scolded a sexual harassment victim, Somaya Tarek, who had turned to her for help after she was attacked in a mall. Saeed later broadcast photos of Tarek criticizing her for a lack of modesty. A social media campaign against Saeed ensued forcing the TV channel Al Nahar to stop the program temporarily while over a dozen major sponsors pulled out. Bassma's tagline is 'sexual harassment doesn't just hurt her, sexual harassment hurts us all,' signalling that it is a societal problem involving many actors, not just women. "As long as women's bodies are used as the space where political conflicts manifest themselves, this will remain a problem," says Sherine Hafez, associate professor of gender and Middle East studies at the University of California Riverside. She told DW that prior to the revolution "sexual harassment...was used in politically repressive ways" by the regime. "This continued during the revolution and after it to terrorize women and families and to create insecurity around political participation." Sexual harassment of women is still widespread in Egypt Complicity In one of the most horrific incidents of sexual assault, Egypt's military forced 'virginity tests' on women in 2011 sparking international outrage and shedding a light on how the state is complicit in engendering sexual violence. "It is one thing to have a law to protect women but without the necessary training of police personnel and society as a whole such laws rely on the individual's ability to use them," Hafez said. New laws punishing sexual harassers for up to five years in prison and fining them up to 5,000 euros were instituted for the first time last year. Zaghloul also says that the state must address legal gaps that add to the precariousness of women reporting an attack. The group plans to expand to other major stations in greater metropolitan Cairo and continue running ads until February 2016. Zaghloul hopes that the campaign will mobilize Egyptians to confront the rising epidemic of sexual harassment. According to a recent UN study over 90 percent of Egyptian women say they were harassed in some form. "We want to change how people view sexual harassment and we want to eliminate or demolish this idea of victim blaming. It is not the woman's fault," she said.


Underground with the Muslim Brotherhood Two years ago, the Muslim Brotherhood was driven underground, after President Mohammed Morsi was deposed. Tensions between the Brotherhood and the regime now seem to be escalating. Naomi Conrad reports from Cairo. As the taxi driver meanders through the late-afternoon traffic in Cairo, he gestures to a mosque beside the road. The entrance is cordoned off with barbed wire, guarded by several soldiers, lounging next to a big army tank. The cabbie shrugs. The mosque, he says, has been closed ever since "that day." It was here, on the busy road leading to one of Cairo's more affluent neighborhoods that protesters gathered in early July of 2013 to demonstrate against the toppling of former president and member of the Muslim Brotherhood, Mohammed Morsi [pictured above in custody]. This followed weeks of mass protests against his rule, which many saw as increasingly undemocratic and authoritarian. Six weeks later, security forces moved into the camp at Rabaa, killing hundreds of protesters. Sitting in an apartment full of brocade furniture and dusty chandeliers not far from Rabaa, Aisha grimaces as she recalls that day. The eloquent 32-year old mother of three, modestly dressed in a loose white hijab and grey tunic, says it was "the hardest day of my life." "Suddenly, it started to rain bullets." She said she saw hundreds die, including many of her friends. Brotherhood driven underground The Muslim Brotherhood was founded some eight decades ago as a means to increase the role of Islam within society. Banned, but tolerated under Hosni Mubarak, it ran a network of charitable institutions and came to political prominence and brief legality after the revolution that ousted the former army officer in 2011. Aisha: Most of the Muslim Brotherhood leaders are in prison or have fled the country Aisha says she is not a member of the Muslim Brotherhood, but her father definitely is: Khairat el-Shater was one of the leading figures within the Muslim Brotherhood and its chief financier. He ran for president in 2012 until he was banned from seeking political office by the electoral commission. Today, the family assets are frozen and her father languishes in jail, sentenced to death along with Morsi and hundreds of other members of the Muslim Brotherhood, which the government has designated a terrorist organization. But Aisha is worried that things might even get worse, following the assassination of Hisham Barakat, Egypt's chief prosecutor and the architect of the country's crackdown on the Muslim Brotherhood and the opposition, who was assassinated on June 29. Young members trying to challenge security forces It's become the rule in Egypt that anything bad that happens "is blindly blamed on the Muslim Brotherhood," Aisha says, "and if you really think about it, all the leaders are in prison." Those who aren't, have fled: Many of the Brotherhood's leadership escaped to Istanbul. And so it's up to young women and men like Shams, to continue the work of the brotherhood in Egypt. The young 22 year old, with a ready smile and fashionable jeans, agreed to meet DW in a flat somewhere in Cairo on condition of absolute anonymity. Anything else he says might prove too dangerous. If anyone found out that he was a member, he'd be arrested, like so many of his friends, he warned. Better days: Supporters of the Muslim Brotherhood in Cairo celebrating Morsi's presidential victory He joined the Muslim Brotherhood in 2011 he says, because he was attracted to its religious ideals. At first, his neighborhood cell, some seven or eight men, would gather in the local mosque to discuss religion, culture, or Syrian politics. But today, following what he calls the military coup, they meet in secret, sneaking into a member's flat one by one – and conversation evolves around Egyptian politics. Once, sometimes twice a week, Shams receives a call, summoning him to a "special dinner" – his cell's code for a protest to challenge the regime. Eventually, the reasoning goes, the security and political situation will deteriorate to such an extent, that the regime might collapse. He grins: The Muslim Brotherhood, he says, needs new leaders, people, who take on a more active leadership and lead the fight against the regime, which, he says - almost as an afterthought - has to remain peaceful. Osama Morsi: 'I can't guarantee anything' That's not a given though: On the veranda of the café of one of Cairo's most expensive neighborhoods I meet Osama, the son of ousted president Morsi. Osama, a lawyer who works as an international legal consultant, chose this location for our meeting. Seeing him at his house would have been too dangerous, he says. A group of bored-looking upper class Egyptian youths sitting close by sip their coffee and stare at their smartphones. Osama shakes his head: Osama, smartly dressed in a shirt and flashy silver watch, believes in the rule of law and non-violence and keeps on emphasizing the need for "democratic and constitutional law." His father, he says, remains the rightful president, removed from power by "elements of the Mubarak regime," who staged a "coup." He denies accusations that his father's regime was seen by many as increasingly "undemocratic." His father, like so many other leaders, is being held in solitary confinement at an unknown location. As the group of bored-looking Egyptians gets up to leave, Osama leans forward: People, he says, referring not only to the Muslim Brotherhood, but to people more generally: "We broke the barrier of fear on the January 25 Revolution. If you break it once, you can always break it again." In Egypt today, it seems, the scene is set for further confrontation: Just days after Barakat's death, special forces killed several Muslim Brotherhood members in a raid in Cairo. Egypt, one journalist told DW, "is in for a hot summer." Heba Farouk Mahfouz in Cairo contributed to this report


Egypt's el-Sissi courts Saudi king There were great expectations as Saudi King Abdulllah made a stopover in Egypt. And while he was only briefly in Cairo, his visit was highly important for Egypt - but few are sure how. His last official visit to a foreign country was more than four years ago - and that has led to plenty of speculation. Egyptians expected Saudi Arabia's King Abdullah to take up serious subjects with the newly elected Egyptian president, Abdel Fattah el-Sissi: Egypt's economic recovery, mutual anti-terror operations and a pan-Arabic alliance to combat the West and Israel. Some Egyptian commentators went further, welcoming that Egypt might "finally return to the cradle of its mother nation" - or suggesting with more restraint that it represented rapprochement between the countries of the Gulf and the Nile. Even if that conjecture was a bit overblown - the Saudi stopped for an in-plane photo-op on Cairo's tarmac on his way back home from vacation in Morocco - the talk remains significant. It was the first real meeting for Egypt's new president with a foreign head of state; el-Sissi had originally expected to travel to Saudi Arabia himself. Egypt's economy, without financial assistance from the Gulf states - specifically Saudia Arabia - would have been driven to ruin. Since the revolution in 2011, the country has been dependent on international aid. The EU, US and Qatar have all sent funds to Cairo. Egyptians place great hope in el-Sissi Previously, it was the emirate of Qatar that played an active role. When the Muslim Brotherhood came to power under former Egyptian President Mohammed Morsi, the emirate's financial contributions were used by Morsi as a shield against his critics. Because it was clear to everyone at that time that subsidies from abroad were needed urgently. Only Morsi was able to loosen the Qatari's purse strings. The Saudis were more reserved at the time due to differences between their own Wahhabism and the Brotherhood. The EU and US promised aid once the Muslim Brotherhood fell from power - funds that, to this day, have yet to arrive. Falling out of favor Here, the small desert state on the Gulf is unrelenting in its pursuit of its interests in Egypt. These are directed against its big neighbor Saudi Arabia. The entire Qatari foreign policy, with its only 200,000 indigenous Qatari citizens, is driven by the fear of one day becoming swallowed by the Saudis. But after the Muslim Brothers fell from grace on June 30, 2013 in Egypt and later in Saudi Arabia, and classified as a terrorist organization in both countries, the tide has turned. The Qataris are considered enemies of the state because of their support for the Muslim Brotherhood. The Cairo offices of the Qatari channel Al-Jazeera were closed and its reporters arrested. Again and again in the streets of Cairo there are pictures of the Emir of Qatar, Tamim bin Hamad Al Thani spray-painted with the Star of David. The message: The Qataris have betrayed the Arab brothers and have taken up with the Israelis. Their common enemy: Egypt, the largest Arab country. Qatar is eyed with suspicion in Egypt Fraternal assistance Europe and the US would rather wait and see what happens next. That means the Egyptians can only turn to the Gulf states. So el-Sissi is playing the same game as his predecessor Morsi. Only he can make billions from the Gulf states flow - and his critics know it. This is why his visit appears all the more significant. It is a gesture, an acknowledgment that the Gulf States, Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, Kuwait and Bahrain are on the side of Egypt, and that they support el-Sissi's policies. How el-Sissi will deal with his critics is still unclear. He repeatedly stressed that rebuilding the economy and restoring security are top priorities - even at the expense of human rights. The mass death sentences in Minya, the repressive law on demonstrations that is still in effect and the harsh sentences against secular political activists are a foretaste of his rule. Above all, the activists who were instrumental in the 2011 revolution see in these policies a return to the police state under Hosni Mubarak, the ousted president, against whom they had taken to the streets. The Muslim Brotherhood, however, is continuing to lose support among the population, and has suffered severe setbacks over the last twelve months, even abroad. Children of the revolution skeptical The secular-minded young people who took part in the revolution cast a skeptical gaze on the advances towards the conservative Gulf states. In social networks they warn that Egypt could become a vassal of Saudi Arabia, which actively tried to prevent the Arab Spring, pointing out that former Tunisian dictator Zine El Abidine Ben Ali took refuge with the Saudi royal family. Before Abdullah's visit to Cairo, they even speculated that the Saudi king was only coming to visit his old friend Mubarak in the hospital, after he broke a thigh bone earlier in the week. El-Sissistill enjoys strong support among the population, who place tremendous hopes in him. This popularity is an opportunity for him to lead the country out of crisis. But this must not come at the expense of other political forces, whether revolution youth or Muslim brothers, who are currently forced into silence. For they will not be silent forever.


From racism to terrorism: How artists are taking on global issues Whether amidst the rubble of Damascus or in Berlin's clubs, artists are giving wounded children a piece of hope and even shaking up political regimes. Change, it seems, can begin with a paint brush or a Middle C. "If you make fun of a politician, you can do more damage than if you hit them in the face," said Iraqi comedian and television show host Ahmed al-Basheer during a panel on how arts and culture can foster dialogue and political change at this year's Global Media Forum in Bonn, Germany. It was the deaths of his brother, father and other relatives at the hands of extremist militants that motivated al-Basheer to fight back - with humor. His satirical Albasheer Show pokes fun at the corrupt regime in Iraq, but also religious clerics and militant organizations. It's been viewed over 50 million times on YouTube and is currently being broadcast on Deutsche Welle's Arabic channel. According to al-Basheer, the show has also led numerous Iraqi politicians to step down.  'Street art is a form of interaction' Ahmed al-Basheer reaches millions in Iraq and around the world While Ahmed al-Basheer, who lives in Jordan because it is too dangerous for him in Iraq, has shaken up the political regime in his country, other artists see their impact as being more indirect. "I can't promise to bring about change, but street art is definitely a form of interaction," graffiti artist Ammar Abo Bakr from Cairo said. When the Egyptian Revolution broke out in 2011, Abo Bakr left his post as assistant professor at the Luxor Institute of Fine Art because he felt he was more needed on the street to record the historical events that were happening. Some of his most famous works depict victims of the rioting that occurred near Cairo's Tahrir Square in 2011 and can be seen in the nearby Mohamed Mahmoud Street.  "It's become the street of death," recalled Abo Bakr. Now, five years later, the situation has calmed in the country, but his public murals "are the last visual memory of what happened." Permalink http://p.dw.com/p/1J6rT A vocal spokesperson against racism and for tolerance in Germany, Samy Deluxe said he'd been frequently asked to pose for campaigns for good causes like AIDS awareness. However, his disappointment with charities led him to found his own organization in support of underprivileged youths, Deluxekidz. In the meantime, Ahmed's concert schedule is jammed packed - particularly after he won the first International Beethoven Prize last year.  With his hand injury, the technical works of Beethoven and Rachmaninoff are out of the question, but he shares melodies from his home country and raises awareness in Germany for the plight of both Syrians and Palestinians. Why Germany needs a psychiatrist Indeed, "music has the perfect power to build bridges," as German-Eritrean musician Fetsum Sebhat (pictured above) said. The Berlin-based singer, who was born in Cairo to Eritrean refugees but grew up in Germany, explained that from the vantage point of the stage, he can look out into the audience and see people standing together who, due to their prejudices, may not otherwise want anything to do with each other. Both Sebhat and rapper Samy Deluxe, whose father came from Sudan, expressed how free they feel in Germany when compared to the hardships faced by artists in the Middle East. However, they also relayed how much discrimination they experienced as children in 1980s Germany. Rapper Samy Deluxe campaigns for tolerance in Germany "I'm fu**ing traumatized from growing up in Germany," said Samy Deluxe, adding that his worst experiences with racism came from people who claimed to be open-minded. "I didn't meet another brown-skinned person until I was 15." "In Germany we are free, but we have psychological problems," said Fetsum Sebhat, referring to Germany's identity struggle when it comes to accepting and integrating people of mixed backgrounds. Born to make art If he lived in a country that was freer and more democratic, would Ahmad al-Basheer still create satire? His reply expressed the intrinsic desire of an artist to create, whatever the circumstances. While al-Basheer remained pessimistic that Iraq will enjoy a greater degree of freedom in the near future, the others were more optimistic. Samy Deluxe pointed out that black children growing up in Berlin today are not subjected to regular insults, as he was, and Fetsum Sebhat agreed that his five-year-old son is growing up in a much more open Germany than he did when he arrived at the same age. As for the war in Syria, pianist Aeham Ahmed found hope in Germany's history:





No unity among Syria's opposition groups A Cairo-organized conference of Syria's opposition has excluded major players. Rebels question Egypt's motives, as some say exclusionary politics risk further dividing a fractured opposition. Kristen McTighe reports. In the past few months, Syrian rebels fighting against the government of Bashar al-Assad have reportedly gained ground. Strategic cities like Idlib and Jisr al-Shughur have fallen to rebel forces and opposition members say there are increasing signs the regime is weakening and could be on its way out. For members of Syria's opposition, now more than ever is the time to unite to put the Assad regime on the back foot. "With the progress made by the Syrian opposition, the regime finds itself finally realizing that they should come to the negotiation table," Hisham Marwah, vice president of the National Coalition of Syrian Revolution and Opposition Forces, also called the Syrian Opposition Coalition, told DW. A selective guest list But as members of Syria's opposition prepare to meet in Cairo on Monday and Tuesday to discuss a roadmap to end Syria's four-year war that has left hundreds of thousands dead, Marwah's key opposition group, which is internationally recognized, will not attend. "We are not invited to come," he said. "Islamic State" militants have taken some key areas, such as Palmyra, in recent weeks Rebel gains inside Syria have ignited a sense of urgency to unite the country's innumerable opposition groups and tie them to a framework that will bring political gain. But some say an effort by Egypt to play a more influential role risks pushing an already-fractured opposition further apart. "This conference is different from all the previous ones held by the Syrian opposition. It will put together a comprehensive national charter and a joint roadmap for a negotiated settlement based on the Geneva Declaration and UN resolutions," Haytham Manna, a leading Syrian opposition figure and one of the organizers of the conference, told Egypt's "Al-Ahram Weekly." The conference, named the "National Opposition Conference for a Political Solution in Syria," is the second meeting in Cairo this year and is hosted by the Egyptian government. "The main objective for Egypt is to invite all the opposition leaders and independent personalities who believe in a political solution and who can bring Syria out of the current crisis," Badr Abdelatty, a spokesman for Egypt's Foreign Ministry, told DW. "We are providing help. We can intervene, but only on the request of the Syrian representatives." Egypt's ulterior motives But while Abdelatty says Egypt only seeks to bring Syrian opposition figures together, the country's staunch opposition to Islamist groups has sowed distrust and left critics questioning Cairo's motives. Egypt is determined that Assad should have a role after any end to the conflict "We need to differentiate between the negative role of the al-Sissi government and its attempt to manipulate the scene, and the Syrian activists who are involved in this initiative and do not all agree with Egypt's controversial actions," Hassan Hachimi, a member of the political bureau of the Syrian Opposition Coalition, told DW. "I think that Cairo's initiative is an attempt to rehabilitate Assad, and more particularly trying to preserve the regime, which is even worse as far as revolution and opposition are concerned." Egypt's current government, which came to power following the 2013 military ouster of its first democratically elected president Mohammed Morsi and his Muslim Brotherhood, has undertaken a harsh crackdown on Islamists and remains deeply distrustful of religiously political movements throughout the region. Cairo has said Assad should be a part of a negotiated settlement. With the majority of opposition groups opposed to a role for Assad, however, the country's ability to play a role in ending the conflict has come into question. "Obviously by being selective in their invitation and refusing to be inclusive, Cairo is attempting to push opposition groups apart and trying to cause further disturbance to the opposition image," Hachimi said. "Really, the opposition is united on a vision for Syria with no Assad and no security forces." Organizers of the meeting have denied that the gathering was sowing division. Syrian opposition member Manna told "Al-Ahram Weekly" the aim of the meeting was not "to divide the Syrian opposition or replace any of the opposition groups." Low expectations Still, the challenge of bringing together opposition forces has highlighted the long-splintered nature of Syria's opposition groups. Al Qaeda's Nusra Front has made some key gains of its own in the country's northeast "The political opposition is as scattered, drifting, and fragmented as ever, there's nothing new there," said Yezid Sayigh, a senior associate at the Carnegie Middle East Center in Beirut, whose work focuses on the Syrian crisis. "No new structures have emerged. As for Cairo, it doesn't seem like anything was done to bring in rebel groups that are not represented by anyone attending." Many critics expect little progress to be made in Cairo this week. "This seems to have a little bit more to do with the Egyptian government's attempt to present themselves as relevant and doing something useful on Syria," said Sayigh. "We've seen for the past four years that political opposition structures have failed, and I don't understand why we keep expecting something new to emerge."


Amnesty International honors Afghan Army documentary at the Berlin International Film Festival A documentary about the lives of soldiers in Afghanistan post-NATO has recieved the Amnesty International Film Award, one of the independent jury prizes at the Berlinale. The jury praised the film's "powerful images." Ahead of the presentation of the Golden and Silver bears on Saturday evening, the independent juries of the Berlin International Film Festival began to present their awards. This includes the Amnesty International Film Award, which, according to the festival's website, seeks to "draw the attention of audiences and representatives of the film industry to the theme of human rights and encourage filmmakers to tackle this topic." 2015's winner was "Tell Spring Not to Come This Year" a British-produced documentary by Saeed Taji Farouky and Michael McEvoy which sees the war in Afghanistan through the eyes of the local soldiers who took over security in the extremely dangerous Helmand Province as NATO forces withdrew from their country. "'Tell Spring Not to Come This Year" shows a country in which war is more normal than peace. With the help of powerful images and a bold camera, we become part of the young Afghan army which is today left to its own devices," said the jury, which consisted of actress Sibel Kekilli, known to English-language audiences through the HBO series "Game of Thrones," director Marcus Vetter, and Markus Beeko of Amnesty International. "The film shows men facing a fight that seems to be hopeless," the jury statement continued, "They do it because they are poor, but also and most importantly because they love their home country and they want to protect their people. Trapped between a population weary of the war and the Taliban, they are caught in a situation where anybody can be their potential enemy." Presented for the 11th time at the Berlin International Film Festival, the prize also comes with a 5,000 euro ($5,695) endowment. Last year's winner was "The Square," a documentary about the 2011 Egyptian revolution, starting from its roots as a protest in Cairo's Tahrir Square. es/gsw (dpa, epd)


Egypt's media openly embrace political bias Political reports stemming from Egypt are displaying a clear lack of objectivity. While the state media support the military and the interim government, privately owned outlets are taking a different path. "A media war" is how Sarah Hartmann - head of the EU-Middle East Forum, a program run by the German Council on Foreign Relations - describes the current press situation in Egypt. She has been closely following the reports emerging from the country, but claims it is "extremely difficult to tell what is really happening from all those different reports and figures." Since the ousting of President Mohammed Morsi by the Egyptian army in early July, Egypt's mass media have been siding with the military and opposing the Muslim Brotherhood. Journalists who report positively on pro-Morsi demonstrations are being put under pressure. Several arrests have taken place. A history of biased reporting According to Berlin-based political scientist Hamadi El-Aouni, there is a tradition in Egypt of the government influencing media reports. "Following the revolution in 1954, the Egyptian state under President Gamal Abdel Nasser decided that the media should play a strategic role," he told DW. The Doha Centre for Media Freedom provides several examples of this. According to its observations, during last year's presidential election many Egyptian newspapers reported on voters in foreign countries. They drew a lot of attention to small groups of Egyptian expatriates who were opposed to Morsi. At the same time, large groups of pro-Morsi Egyptians abroad were mostly ignored, creating a skewed picture of the situation for Egyptians at home. In addition to this, certain formulations and images were deliberately chosen to cover up some facts. All this resulted in misleading and manipulated reporting. Violent clashes on Egypt's streets are making journalists' work even more difficult According to El-Aouni, this form of journalism is still going strong. "Reporting in Egypt means serving as a mouthpiece of the politicians, state and government," he said. He pointed out that the heads of Egypt's state newspapers were initially very cautious when Morsi was ousted. "Every chief editor of a state newspaper is still waiting to see what direction the new regime will take and what expectations on the part of the army he needs to take into account," Attija Eissawi, managing editor of the "Al-Ahram" newspaper told German journalists. No voice for Morsi supporters The millions that support Morsi are currently not being given a say in Egyptian media. There is also little mention of the number of casualties resulting from the clearing of the pro-Morsi protest camp by the security forces. International Arabic-language broadcasters are providing a counterweight - among them Al Arabiya, Al Jazeera, Deutsche Welle and BBC Arabic. Of these, Qatar-based Al Jazeera has the biggest viewer base in Egypt. It originally established itself as a serious international broadcaster, but then came under suspicion of acting as a mouthpiece of the Muslim Brotherhood. Some Al Jazeera journalists have quit as a result. El-Aouni shares these doubts. He calls Al Jazeera a "propaganda channel" of the Muslim Brotherhood and believes it is waging war on the Egyptian opposition. Al Jazeera has been accused of producing one-sided reports on Egypt's political situation Financial backing for religious broadcasters In the private media sector, numerous broadcasters can be found that categorize themselves as religiously motivated, said El-Aouni. They are financed by billionaires from the Persian Gulf states "so that they propagate a certain Islamic philosophy around the world, especially in the Arab countries." He believes Saudi Arabia has the biggest influence in this field. "All mass media outlets, both private and state-owned, are clearly biased at the moment," commented Hartmann. Another major problem in communicating information is Egypt's high illiteracy rate and the fact that many Egyptians have no television or Internet access. El-Aouni, meanwhile, provides a pithy summary of the current media influence situation in the country: "Around 40 percent of Egyptians either follow the state media exclusively or readily accept the propaganda and information issued by the Muslim Brotherhood."


Egypt braces for rival rallies on anniversary of 1973 war Egypt's interim president has called for nationwide demonstrations to commemorate the 1973 Arab-Israeli war. But Islamists have vowed to march on Tahrir Square in protest against the military-backed government. The Egyptian Interior Ministry has warned that it would "firmly confront" any unrest that disrupts the 40th anniversary on Sunday of Cairo's 1973 war with Israel. Authorities have tightened security across the country in anticipation of protests, according to state media. "The Interior Ministry warns against attempts that may disturb the October 6 celebrations in Egypt," state news agency MENA quoted the ministry as saying. Interim President Adly Mansour had called on Egyptians to take to the streets and commemorate the war's anniversary by supporting the armed forces. "Be everywhere in Egypt, all streets and squares to celebrate your victory and support your army," Mansour said in a televised speech on Saturday. The 1973 war paved the way for the 1979 peace agreement, under which Israel gave the Sinai Peninsula back to Egypt. Brotherhood calls demonstrations But supporters of the outlawed Muslim Brotherhood and ousted President Mohammed Morsi have called for protests in Tahrir Square, which has been sealed off by the military. "The Egypt Anti-Coup Alliance repeats its call to all Egyptians to continue their protests in every part of Egypt, and to gather in Tahrir Square on Sunday, October 6, to celebrate the army of that victory and its leaders," the bloc said in a press release. According to political scientist Hassan Nafaa, the Anti-Coup Alliance wants to strip the army of its legacy and pride. "They will try to show that the present army is not the army of all Egyptians, but only of those who backed the coup," Nafaa, a professor at Cairo University, told the AFP news agency. The Brotherhood has been systematically targeted by the military-backed government since Morsi's overthrow, with most of the group's leadership detained and awaiting trial. Potential for confrontation The Tamarod movement, which organized the mass protests that led to Morsi's July overthrow, has also called for demonstrations on Sunday. "We call all Egyptians to come out tomorrow across all squares in the country to assert that this nation will not allow its revolution to be stolen," prominent Tamarod leader Mahmoud Badr told reporters on Saturday. On Friday, supporters and opponents of former President Morsi clashed in Cairo, leaving four people dead and another 40 wounded. Since Morsi's overthrow by the military on July 3, clashes between demonstrators and the military have left hundreds dead. slk/lw (AFP, dpa)


Can art and culture make the world a better place? Amid war and conflict around the world, the role of art and culture in rebuilding societies is often forgotten, as is its function in preventing conflict, Goethe-Institut General Secretary Johannes Ebert tells DW. Chinese artist Ai Weiwei has been active in building bridges through art I think basically, there is a similar effect. The Goethe-Institut is not active in war zones, but after a military crisis, I think culture is very important because it can bring people together; culture is very often closely linked to civil society. You see it in the Middle East and in other areas, also in the Ukraine, that civil society plays a very big role in the cultural field. And by doing cultural projects with civil society groups, you can support them, enable them, to deepen their influence on society. Another thing is that with cultural projects, of course which is very important in crisis and post-crisis areas, is you can address the past. We know from our own German history that reflection about the past is very important to create a sane and stable society. I have been working in many countries – in Russia, Ukraine, the Middle East - where this topic is often excluded. These are places where it is not common to talk about personal conflicts within society, about the guilt. It's more common to neglect these issues and just move on. And I think cultural projects can deal with these very delicate subjects of a shared but cruel and difficult past. And I think this kind of reconciliation is very important for the future of a society after a crisis. Johannes Ebert Exactly! We say there has to be education. And I have been to Amman where there is a project and children come from two hours away to take part in the reading classes. But as I said, it has different effects - education, creativity, and it's creating a certain sensibility among the kids. But it also makes them reflect on their own personal past and what they suffered on their journeys. And I think this perhaps a good example of the complexity that art projects can offer.


50th Anniversary: Strengthening media development People need access to information if they are to be part of discussions and decision-making processes. DW Akademie's commitment to supporting independent media worldwide was celebrated at its 50th anniversary in Berlin. Six out of seven people in the world have no - or only partial - access to information, but a free media can help societies develop an open dialogue where every voice can be heard. "DW Akademie's activities help people around the world realize this fundamental human right, and supports those who otherwise have no means of expression," underlined Germany's federal development minister Gerd Müller speaking at the event. He acknowledged Deutsche Welle, and especially DW Akademie, for its decades-long involvement in media development. "We are proud that you are a partner," he said. DW Akademie had invited some 160 guests from politics and civil society to take part in its 50th anniversary celebration, including ambassadors and international project partners.  Actively involved and committed Christian Gramsch, DW Akademie director DW Akademie Director, Christian Gramsch, opened the event thanking project partners and participants who over the past 50 years have been committed to media development. "We dedicate this evening to you," he said amid applause. These partners include initiatives that champion women's right to be heard, journalists who fight against censorship and have the courage to speak the truth, and community radio stations that break social taboos through open dialogues.  International guests also came to Berlin to celebrate, including U Thiha Saw, the Executive Director of the Myanmar Journalism Institute. He spoke about his country's changing media landscape and how much it meant that after decades of censorship, the country now had its first independent press council to monitor ethical standards of reporting. He also pointed to members of ethnic minorities who are now, for the first time, establishing their own media and producing their own content. "Together with DW Akademie," he added, "we were able to train some 400 journalists on election reporting ahead of the November polls."  But with the crises and upheavals in Ukraine and Egypt, journalists there are being pushed aside, said two media experts. The journalist Basma El-Oufy from Egypt pointed out that many Egyptian journalists were fighting censorship and remained committed to free and independent information. "We are trying to increase the room we have to maneuver as much as possible," she said. Oleksandr Kharebin, Deputy Director General of Ukraine's state broadcaster, the National Television Company of Ukraine, recounted how he and DW Akademie were turning the station into a public service broadcaster. "We are proud of how much we've achieved," he said.  Innovation from Africa Claudette Irere, kLab The evening also looked at the media revolution taking place in Africa where the digital and start-up scene is booming. Young entrepreneurs in innovation centers are developing apps tailored to meet the specific needs of various regions. These include solar kiosks for charging cell-phone batteries and apps for credit transfers between different phone companies.  "More than half of the African population is under the age of 24, and more cell phones are being distributed in sub-Saharan Africa than anywhere else in the world. Opportunities for innovation and development are huge!” said Claudia Irere, General Manager of kLab (knowledge Lab), in her passionate keynote speech. kLab is an innovations center for digital start-ups in Rwanda.  Irere pointed to the wealth of ideas in her country, but said international cooperations were still missing. “We spend a lot of time re-inventing the wheel, but a greater exchange of know-how, ideas and infrastructure with Silicon Valley, for example, would release enormous synergy! I’m talking about North-South partnerships.”  Development minister Müller emphasized the potential of African innovations in terms of global development. “For many people, especially in Africa, the Internet opens a door to the world, and a chance to participate.” It was important to recognize the possibilities offered by digital change, he said, and to continue focusing on using media wisely and on establishing independent media. This, he said, would not only develop understanding but could even prevent crises. “That’s why we need to step up for human rights in the digital world as well,” he said.  Tolerance and understanding German Development Minister Gerd Müller (photo: Rainer Freese). “Deutsche Welle together with DW Akademie reflect an open-minded Germany,” said DW Director General Peter Limbourg as he thanked DW Akademie staff and alumni, partners and sponsors, for their commitment. These are people, he said, who have together made an essential and lasting contribution to a free press and freedom of information, both in Germany and internationally. Given the current refugee crisis, he pointed out, it was more important than ever to show tolerance, understanding and open-mindedness.  Two-time Olympia figure-skating champion, Katarina Witt, spoke on behalf of the prominent figures and journalists taking part in DW’s “We are Germany” campaign (Wir sind Deutschland). Her international career as an athlete had taught her one of the most important things of all, she said. “We share this planet and we all have the same goal: to live well and peacefully together.”  To round off the evening, Munich’s popular hip-hop band EINSHOCH6 played an exclusive concert, showing how German hip-hop with all its insights fitted this celebration of 50 years of media development. EINHOCH6’s “Bandtagebuch” (A Band’s Diary) is an important part of DW’s German language courses, and inspires fans around the world to learn German through music. “Bandtagebuch 2” will be released in spring 2016. The last song of the evening was a sing-along. After all, one can’t celebrate an event like this without a round of “Happy Birthday, DW Akademie!”


Egypt ups efforts to protect cultural heritage Protecting valuable antiquities is a serious task in Egypt, where grave robbery has increased dramatically since 2011. German researchers accused of the crime are currently standing trial in Cairo. "Look at the cracks - the pyramids are really in danger," says Osama Karar, as he points to the screen of his laptop, and flicks through countless photos showing damage to the Great Pyramid of Giza. Karar and his colleagues have founded an organization called The People's Front in Defence of Relics. He turns from his laptop, and looks outside at the huge pyramid stretching out before him. "These stones can't speak, so we try and give them a voice," he says. Indeed, the stones of the Great Pyramid would have a lot to tell. For example, that in April 2013, a German research team led by the Chemnitz-based experimental archaeologist Dominique Görlitz entered a small room under the tip of the pyramid - the King's Chamber belonging to Pharaoh Khufu. The team took samples from the murals and cartouche, and brought them back to Germany for laboratory analysis. And all this without the proper permit. They were granted a partial permit, as Ali Ahmad Ali from the Ministry of State for Antiquities in Cairo stressed, but "the permit does not cover a visit to the upper chamber. And the permit says: only visit, do not take any parts." On Saturday (7.06.2014), the trial of the research team - made up of three Germans and their six Egyptian assistants - got underway in Cairo. They are accused of vandalism offenses in the Great Pyramid of Giza, and at worst, could face between three and five years in prison. Chaos after the revolution Egyptologist Monica Hanna says grave robberies have skyrocketed in recent years In recent times, Egyptian authorities have been quick to react when it comes to protecting their cultural heritage. Over the last three years, many important sites have been damaged. Illegal excavations in unexplored, mostly desert areas are a significant problem. Egyptologist Monica Hanna says she's counted more than 200 sites that have been affected by looting. She works with a team of volunteers to document illegal excavations, and monitor sites using satellite images. They've seen grave robbery increase by about 300 percent in the past three years. "We estimate that between 100 and 150 objects have gone missing every day since 2011," Hanna says. 2011 was a crucial time for Egypt - it was the year the revolution took place, and the year both state and police control collapsed. The Ministry of State for Antiquities estimates that Egypt has since lost about $3 billion (2.1 billion euros) to the illegal historical artifact trade. But for Ali Ahmad Ali, it's not just about the money. "Egypt is losing its heritage," he says. "We can't put a value on our heritage. It's invaluable." Osama Karar: 'The pyramids are really in danger' But that idea isn't present in the minds of many Egyptians. "For 30 years under Mubarak, they had us believe that the antiquities belonged to the Ministry and the tourists," says Osama Karar. "They didn't belong to us Egyptians." He asks how people can be expected to appreciate and protect something they don't feel responsible for in the first place. No place for Indiana Jones Monica Hanna also criticizes the way the government has managed the heritage of the massive country. For many decades, only foreign researchers were given approval to work on excavation sites. Hardly any archaeological studies have been published in Arabic. The authorization procedures were lax. Dominique Görlitz and his party were probably counting on the authorities to continue as they had in the past. His companion, the author Stefan Erdmann, had assured him that everything was in order with the permits, and Görlitz had no reason to doubt him. Erdmann had worked for many decades in Egypt, and had explored the Great Pyramid of Giza several times. Görlitz marvels today at the informal form of authorization required to enter the pyramid. "Why do we get issued a permit that has nothing on it? No name, nor where we are allowed to go, what we're not allowed to do, which rooms we're allowed to enter," he says, adding that many researchers before him had worked in this way, because it was common practice. It's precisely this attitude that irks Hanna. Many foreigners still have a very colonial outlook, she says. "Westerners continue to come to Egypt and behave as if they were Indiana Jones and can do what they want," she says. But those days appear to be coming to an end, as Egyptians increasingly seek to exert control over the sites and objects associated with their own cultural heritage.


Media and diplomacy facing huge challenges Foreign policy in the digital age is the focus of the Global Media Forum from June 22-24, 2015, in Bonn. DW will launch its new English TV channel at the conference featuring high-profile guests from around the world. Advances in digital information and communication technologies are transforming foreign policy and international diplomacy. Universal interconnectedness requires new ways of thinking. The reframing of foreign policy affects diplomacy and many key segments related to it, from human rights, security and governance through to commerce and various facets of development cooperation. More than 2,000 international guests from the fields of politics, diplomacy, media and social activism are expected to attend this year's Deutsche Welle Global Media Forum, which takes place from June 22-24 at the World Conference Center in Bonn, Germany. This 8th edition of the annual conference series will examine the opportunities and risks posed by "Media and Foreign Policy in the Digital Age." Official launch of DW's new English TV channel The media conference is an ideal stage to launch DW's new 24-hour TV channel in English. Germany's Government Commissioner for Culture and the Media, Monika Grütters, will join DW Director General Peter Limbourg for the ceremonial launch on Monday, June 22. The news and information channel featuring hourly updates, magazine programs and documentaries will be broadcast around the world. Germany's international broadcaster will also extend its other TV programming in German, Spanish and Arabic. Many guests and high-profile speakers will be on hand to witness the official launch at the World Conference Center in Bonn. Among those taking part in the Global Media Forum's three days of workshops and panel discussions are Vitali Klitschko, Mayor of Kyiv; Richard Porter, Editorial and Digital Director of BBC Global News; Prof. Artur Nowak-Far, Under Secretary of State in Poland's Ministry of Foreign Affairs; Günter Oettinger, the EU Commissioner for Digital Economy and Society; and Dunja Mijatovic, the OSCE Representative on Freedom of the Media. Also attending in Bonn will be Egyptian journalist Reem Maged, whose socially critical weekly TV program "Women at a Turning Point", a coproduction by DW and its partner broadcaster ONTV in Cairo, was recently taken off the air by Egyptian security officials. Antonia Rados, the Chief Correspondent for Foreign Affairs at Germany's RTL Television, also brings years of experience and expertise to the talks lined up in the conference program. Rethinking coverage of crises and conflicts On the first day, the "Media Summit" will examine the changes taking place in international media coverage of crises and conflicts. Among other aspects, the panelists will discuss whether journalists working in an ever faster media world run the risk of neglecting in-depth analysis of current events and favoring a friend-versus-foe mindset. EU Commissioner Günter Oettinger will give a keynote speech. The digital revolution has had massive impact on modern diplomacy. "Foreign policy in 140 characters: How technology is redefining diplomacy" will be the focus of debate between prominent experts in the panel discussion on Tuesday. Where foreign policy decisions were once the result of secret negotiations, new players have now entered the diplomatic stage. An increasingly uncontrollable flow of information and a directional shift in communications have changed social structures. Another central debate will take place on Wednesday, spotlighting the dangers surrounding conflicts over natural resources, one of today's greatest risks to security. Such clashes often arise in places where abundant resources promise to generate income – paradoxically, in countries that have huge deposits of oil, gas and precious metals. Repeatedly they lead to population displacement and migration caused by hunger, ethnic or religious strife, human rights violations and environmental destruction. On the last day of the conference, Scilla Elworthy will address her main issues of study – the equal importance of politics, military interests and civil society for sustainable global security strategy. As founder of the renowned Oxford Research Group, Elworthy has been nominated for the Nobel Peace Prize three times. The 2015 Bobs Awards ceremony The main winners of this year's annual DW international competition, The BOBs – Best of Online Activism, will be honored on Tuesday, June 23. In addition to the three jury-selected prizes, the Deutsche Welle Freedom of Speech Award will be conferred for the first time. DW Director General Peter Limbourg will present the award for imprisoned Saudi Arabian blogger Raif Badawi. Deutsche Welle will broadcast the ceremony to its global audience. International partners and co-hosts DW's partners for the approximately 40 workshops and events being held at the 2015 Global Media Forum include, among others, Amnesty International, Grimme-Institut, the United Nations, the OSCE, Reporters Without Borders Germany and the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. The conference is co-hosted by the Foundation for International Dialogue of the Savings Bank in Bonn. Support is also kindly provided by Germany's Federal Foreign Office, the Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperation and Development, the City of Bonn and the Robert Bosch Stiftung. June 8, 2015  Conference program: http://issuu.com/deutsche-welle/docs/global-media-forum-15-program Conference website: www.dw.com/gmf


Egypt opposition bets on risky alliance with military The opponents of President Morsi have asked Egypt's military to help oust the Islamist-leaning government. But it remains unclear what the army would seek to gain from an intervention on the side of the protesters. The call for help was impossible to oversee. "We call on the military to save Egypt from the Muslim Brotherhood," wrote opponents of President Mohammed Morsi on a large protest sign. It's unclear whether or not the military actually read the protesters' call for intervention. But the generals' reaction to the mass demonstrations last Sunday came without delay. On Monday, the army's top brass gave the Muslim Brotherhood and the opposition 48 hours to resolve their differences. If the two sides prove unable to find a compromise, then the military will propose its own roadmap to solve the political crisis. In a statement read in the name of the Egyptian military, General Abdel Fattah el-Sissi said that the roadmap would "include all the major social groups as well as the youth, who started this wonderful revolution." Anti-Morsi protesters have called on the military to intervene While the statement did not elaborate on the details of the roadmap, the military did make clear that it meant business. If the demands of the Egyptian people are not fulfilled, then "we [the military] will be forced to fulfill our historical responsibility toward our land and the great Egyptian nation, and draft a roadmap in agreement with the Egyptian people." Military displays solidarity with protesters While the concept of a "roadmap" for the future may be ambiguous, there are many indications that the demonstrators have good reason to count on the military's support. On Sunday, army helicopters flew at low altitude over Tahrir Square, flying Egyptian national flags. Protesters and commentators alike interpreted the flyover as a gesture of solidarity. Large swathes of Egyptian society could gain something from an intervention by the military, according to political scientist Maha Azzam, with the think tank Chatham House in London. "It doesn't necessarily mean that they want a military takeover, although some of them do," Azzam told DW. "But that they want a military intervention that would facilitate...civil society's aims. That is the removal of President Morsi, although he has been the first - as we know - freely elected president of Egypt." Generals' ambiguous role The Egyptian military is subordinate to the head of state, who is currently President Morsi. But unlike the Muslim Brotherhood, the armed forces also have a long secular tradition. During the political transition, protesters criticized the military Under General Gamal Abdel-Nasser, the military adopted a leftist-nationalist ethos, which it maintains today. Nasser defined Egypt's political course from 1952-1970, first in several ministerial positions and then later as president. But the values adopted during Nasser's era did not stop the military from acting as the backbone of every authoritarian regime in Egypt up until the revolution in January 2011, according to Azzam with Chatham House. And more than a few Morsi opponents remember that the military has played an ambiguous role over the past two and a half years, according to Annette Ranko, with the German Institute for Global and Area Studies in Hamburg. "When the military was responsible for the transition process after the fall of Mubarak, there was a lot of opposition to the military, because there was the fear that it would not give up political power," Ranko told DW. Many Egyptians also haven't forgotten the so-called "redline," whereby the military forbid any public criticism of the role it played during the revolution. And then there's the searing image of a young female demonstrator at Tahrir Square, who was brutally stripped and beaten by soldiers. The army's leadership later apologized for that incident. Feeling of powerlessness If segments of the opposition are banking on the military, it's above all because they feel powerless in comparison to President Morsi, according to Ranko. Morsi admitted in his last speech that he had only spoken with the heads of the traditional opposition parties and not with Egypt's youth, she said. Pro-Morsi demonstrators have also taken to the streets "There are a lot of sclerotic structures, not only among the Islamists, but also among the leftist and liberal parties," Ranko said. "There simply hasn't been a platform for young people there. And out of this powerlessness, they have turned to the military as a partner." But what motivates the military to more or less directly support Morsi's opponents? Azzam with the think tank Chatham House believes that the generals couldn't warm up to the Muslim Brotherhood's Islamist political persuasion. And now the military sees the chance to slightly shift the balance of power. "What they are saying, is that we want to have the look of a civilian government, but we are remaining very much in control of the situation," Azzam said. "This is very much what Egypt was hoping to move away from." But according to Ranko, a return to pre-revolutionary political conditions is no longer possible in Egypt, even if the military were to impose such conditions by force. "The military has to adapt to the changes in Egypt, whether it wants to or not," she said. "There is no alternative."


Egypt rocked by protests, violence on revolution's anniversary Anti-government protesters and security forces have clashed in Egypt, leaving several people dead. Meanwhile, a police station in Sinai has been rocked by an explosion one day after a series of bomb attacks in Cairo. Thousands of pro-military demonstrators marched in Tahrir Square on Saturday, commemorating the third anniversary of Egypt's turbulent revolution, which led to the downfall of longtime dictator Hosni Mubarak. Some of the pro-military demonstrators chanted slogans calling for General Abdel-Fattah el-Sissi to run for president and demanding the execution of the Muslim Brotherhood's leaders. Meanwhile, a mix of pro-Brotherhood Islamists and secular liberals tried to hold anti-government counterdemonstrations. But security forces fired teargas and birdshot at the protesters in clashes that left 29 people dead and dozens injured nationwide. 'Break the coup' In a statement released during Saturday's clashes, the Muslim Brotherhood vowed to continue demonstrating "until it regains its rights and breaks the coup and puts the killers on trial." Last July, General el-Sissi launched a military coup in response to anti-Islamist demonstrations that had swelled into the millions. El-Sissi overthrew Mohammed Morsi, an Islamist and Egypt's first democratically elected president, installing an interim government in his stead. Clashes that summer left 1,000 Morsi supporters dead. The military subsequently declared the Muslim Brotherhood a terrorist organization and jailed its leaders. More bomb attacks In the restive Sinai Peninsula, a car bomb exploded near a police camp in the city of Suez on Saturday. Earlier in the day, another bomb went off next to a police training institute in Cairo. It remains unclear whether anyone was harmed in those attacks. A military helicopter also crashed in Sinai on Saturday, leaving its five-member crew dead. The military said it was investigating the cause of the crash. On Friday, Islamist militants detonated four bombs targeting the Egyptian police, leaving at least six people dead. An al Qaeda-linked group, Ansar Beit al-Maqdis, claimed responsibility for Friday's bombings, saying that they were part of a broader campaign against the Egyptian state. The group, whose name means Partisans of Jerusalem, said the explosives had been detonated remotely and warned Muslims to stay away from police stations. slk/mkg (AP, AFP, dpa, Reuters)


How publishers deal with politically persecuted authors In countries like China, Egypt or Iran, publishing a book can be a crime. As the Frankfurt Book Fair opens, here are publishers that give silenced authors a voice. One even helped its author defect. Persian literature makes up a large part of what the P. Kirchheim Verlag, a small German publishing house in Munich, does. "I am particularly interested in authors who take on political issues, and in literature from Iran that does not exclude that aspect," says the publisher.  In September, the latest novel by one of his most prominent authors, Amir Hassan Cheheltan, was published in Germany under the title "Iranische Dämmerung" (Iranian Twilight). In his homeland of Iran, the book is only available in a very reduced, mutilated form. When it was to be crowned the best book of the year in Tehran, the author vehemently opposed the prize.  Perhaps his most important novel - "Revolution Street" - was first published in 2009 in German and not until 2014 in English. The book, which vividly depicts life in post-revolutionary Tehran, is not available for purchase in Iran. "He has become very cautious," Peter Kirchheim said of Cheheltan, who used to chair Iran's writers' association. "Like many other Iranian authors, he tries to publish abroad where nobody can impede his work." Iranian author Amir Hassan Cheheltan Kirchheim's aim is to paint a differentiated view of Iranian cultural for German readers. "Most of the news concentrates on political issues, especially on the attempts of the West to prevent Iran from producing a nuclear bomb. But there is also a Western lifestyle there, hidden behind a veil," he added.  Uncovering the works of suppressed writers  Since its creation in 1975, the Unionsverlag publishing house directs readers' attention to distant, foreign and often politically volatile regions. It's fitting that the publishing house chose the slogan "Around the world in 40 years" to celebrate its 40th anniversary. Publisher Lucien Leitess has vowed to focus on regions and issues that are often suppressed or ignored.  Nevertheless, literary quality is also of utmost importance for him: "We do not select books according to their risk factor, but rather according to their literary importance. In this way, one inevitably moves on to regions of the world where authors, as well as journalists and other people, are living in danger," he said.  Leitess has published works by renowned authors who have been persecuted in their home countries: Among them are Egyptian Nobel laureate Naguib Mahfouz who was stabbed by Islamist assassins; Algerian writer Assia Djebar, who was forced into exile; the repeatedly imprisoned Turkish novelist Yaşar Kemal; and Indonesian writer Pramoedya Ananta Toer, who was abducted to an island for convicts. Iranian author Mahmoud Dowlatabadi "For such authors, one is not only a book producer and publisher, but also an ally. We are a support for the author," said Leitess.  Prison books on toilet paper   That also holds true for the Unionsverlag when it comes to Iranian author Mahmoud Dowlatabadi, considered a living legend in his home country. His novel, "Kelidar," which he wrote on toilet paper in prison under the Shah regime, was later published in Zurich. Unionsverlag also published the first edition of his novel "The Colonel," a bleak and shocking panorama of the era of the Islamic Revolution under Khomeini.  At that time, the Iranian censors had informed Dowlatabi that "The Colonel" was a masterpiece, and that it was impossible to cut anything, but that at the same time, it was not possible to publish it - and they have never permitted its publication.  The objective of Chinese author Liao Yiwu, who writes books with literary interviews, is to portray "China's society from below." The exiled author, who was awarded the Peace Prize of the German Book Trade, three years ago, wants to reveal what official propaganda covers up. "I consider myself as a recorder of present times, recording what other people tell me," says the author.  Chinese authorities arrested Liao Yiwu for "spreading counter-revolutionary propaganda," sentencing him to four years in prison. Following his release, he recorded the bitter experiences he'd had while in custody, but his manuscript was immediately confiscated. The authorities made clear that the author would have to atone for publishing his work. But Liao Yiwu was determined to not give in - and was supported by his German publisher.  "He has clearly stated that he wanted the book to be published. At the same time, we felt responsible for the author's safety and we did not want to jeopardize him. So that was an extremely difficult situation," recalled Fischer's program director Peter Sillem. The cover of Liao Yiwu's most wellknown books in German. When a publisher helps a writer defect  The author and his publishing house have been in close contact ever since the book, "The Corpse Walker: Real Life Stories: China From the Bottom Up") was published in German in 2009. Two years later, this professional relations led to a small conspiracy. Vietnam, Liao Yiwu fled from his home country to Germany.  The Fischer publishing house knew about the plans, which is why Peter Sillem was sitting in his Frankfurt office when problems arose in Hanoi. After Liao Yiwu successfully managed to make it out of Vietnam and enter Germany, Sillem welcomed the author in Berlin.  In 2011, Fischer published "For a Song and a Hundred Songs," Liao Yiwu had written in jail. The following year saw the publication of "The Bullet and the Opium," focusing on the Tiananmen Square massacre.  Liao Yiwu is currently working on his next novel in Berlin. For the first time in his life, he can write freely. For Sillem, his collaboration with the dissident writer has been a memorable experience. "You becomes aware of something that you just doen't think about on a daily basis: That it's not at all matter-of-fact that books may be published. And how existential literature can be - literally speaking. It is a great fortune to be able to help a writer publish a book that a powerful government wanted to destroy. This book is now available - nobody can change that now."


Egypt-Iran passenger flights resume after 30 years After three decades of detours, travelers in Egypt and Iran are now once again to take direct flights between the two countries. The resumption of direct flights is seen as further proof of warmer diplomatic ties. The first direct flight between Egypt and Iran left Saturday from Cairo and was bound for Tehran. On board the privately-chartered Air Memphis flight, according to Cairo airport officials, were eight Iranians. Egypt and Iran ended diplomatic relations following Iran's Islamic revolution in 1979. However, since the election of Egyptian President Mohamed Morsi, relations between the two nations have improved. An agreement on the non-stop passenger flights between Sunni-majority Egypt and Shiite Iran was signed by Egypt's Tourism Minister Hesham Zaazou on a trip to Iran last month. The movements of Iranian visitors are still subject to certain restrictions in Egypt. In February, Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad paid a visit to Egypt – the first Iranian leader to do so in over 30 years. Egypt's fallen dictator, Hosni Mubarak, was a staunch opponent of Tehran. mz/hc (AP, AFP, dpa)


Morsi's patience wearing thin with Egypt opposition Egypt's Islamist President Mohammed Morsi has warned critics, planning mass protests on Sunday to press for early elections, that he will not yield. Morsi singled out private media, saying his patience had run out. Egyptian President Mohammed Morsi reviewed his first year in office with a wide-ranging televised speech late on Wednesday, admitting that he had made mistakes and warning his critics not to "impose opinions." Hours earlier, the Egyptian military said it was bringing reinforcements closer to Egypt's main cities, apparently as a precaution if violence erupts on Sunday – the anniversary of Morsi's inauguration as president in 2012. Organizers of a campaign dubbed Tamarod (rebellion in Arabic) say they have collected more than 15 million signatures in support of a snap presidential election. They accuse Morsi of mismanagement and failing to bring about social justice. Morsi, during his speech, insisted he was working for the goals of the revolution that toppled the former military-backed president Hosni Mubarak in early 2011. Hundreds of protestors watched his speech in Cairo's Tahrir Square (pictured above) and outside the Defense Ministry. They chanted "leave." Warns media During his speech to cabinet ministers and officials from his Muslim Brotherhood in a Cairo conference hall, Morsi singled out a private satellite television channel, CBC, accusing it of obstructing the country's political transition. "One year is enough!" he said, referring to critics. He also warned what he termed the "patriotic opposition," saying he did not want to "inadvertently engage in an attack on the revolution." Protests were legitimate to "raise your opinion," Morsi said, but protests should not be used to "impose your opinion." He blamed security breaches on "thugs." He said one of his achievements was overseeing the drafting of Egypt's new constitution. It was formulated by a mainly Islamist panel and slammed by the opposition for failing to represent a cross-section of Egyptians, including minority Coptic Christians. Pledged reforms He pledged "radical and quick" reforms in state institutions and said he would do more to involve Egypt's youth by requiring provincial governors to appoint assistants under the age of 40. Morsi backers plan a rally of their own on Friday in Cairo. The city's Tahrir Square was the epicenter of the 2011 revolt that topped Mubarak. Just hours before Morsi made his address, fighting erupted in the Nile Delta city of Mansura, where Islamists holding a rally were confronted by opponents. At least one person was killed and 237 others were hurt, health ministry officials said. Two of the injured had bullet wounds, said medics. ipj/slk (dpa, AP, AFP)


Quadriga - Inside IS - The Structure of Terror After beheading yet another western hostage, the Islamic State terrorist organization is now threatening direct attacks on the US and Britain. Documents that have recently come to light allow some insights into the group’s structure, and reveal an extensive finance network and sophisticated logistics systems for weapons and supplies. Is IS more powerful than experts previously believed? Secret documents seized in Iraq include lists naming the estimated 20,000 fighters in the group, as well as potential suicide attackers. There are also indications that members of the organization are provided with extensive benefits - including the procurement of women. IS is apparently not only a terrorist state in name, but one that has also developed a state’s bureaucratic structures. It’s governing ‘caliphate’, which currently holds the reins of power in an area with a population of around seven million inhabitants, apparently has access to billions in cash and other monetary instruments. IS uses public execution as a tool to spread fear and cement its hold on power. Since the end of June, its agents have murdered 1,400 Syrians alone - shooting them, beheading them, or stoning them to death. Those numbers, which come from a Syrian human rights organization based in Britain, don’t reflect the many more casualties that have occurred on the battlefield. Members of IS have joined a tightly-knit band that secures the loyalty of followers with supplies and extensive support. Where is the IS largesse coming from? What aspects of the terrorist organization draw adherents - including many from Europe? How does it retain their allegiance? And how can democratic nations fight the threat the organization poses? Inside IS - The Structure of Terror Let us know what you think: quadriga(at)dw.de Inside IS - The Structure of Terror Amir Musawy – is the Berlin correspondent for Iraqia TV. He studied media and political science in Bonn, Germany, and has reported for Associated Press in London. Musawy has worked for the Iraqi foreign ministry and several NGOs in his capacity as a political scientist and media consultant. He has taught Media & Communication at the University of Minsk in Belarus. Asiem El Difraoui– studied politics and economics in Cairo, London and then Paris, where he received his Ph.D. He worked as editor in chief for IP Productions, a news agency focusing on the Middle East and the Arab world. He has written numerous prize-winning documentary films and news reports. He formed part of the Middle East and Africa research group at the German Institute for International and Security Affairs, focusing on jihadist propaganda on the internet. He is currently a Senior Fellow at the Institute for Media and Communication Policy in Berlin. His latest book deals with Egyptian society after the revolution. Antje Bauer– The freelance journalist majored in political science and Islamic studies and now works as a reporter specializing in the Middle East, Turkey and Afghanistan. From 1988 to 1993 she was based in Madrid as the Spain correspondent for the Tageszeitung (taz). Her journalistic repertoire includes print and radio reports for Germany's ARD public broadcasting network. She has also translated the novel "Baksheesh" by Esmahan Aykol from Turkish into German. Additionally Antje Bauer works with the Deutsche Welle Academy, offering workshops for journalists in the Arab world.


Generation gap eats at Muslim Brotherhood In a movement that's nearly a century old and has long been led by aging men, it's the youth of Egypt's Muslim Brotherhood who are beginning to call the shots. Kristen McTighe reports from Cairo. "Communication [with the younger generation] and trying to understand the youth didn't start until after the ship sank, after the coup and the massacre," said Hend, a 20-year-old member of the Muslim Brotherhood who asked to go by only her first name because of the crackdown on the group. "Most of our leaders are now in jail. Most revolutionary movements come from the streets where the youth have played an essential role." "This is a battle of youth," she told DW. Frustrated and impatient with a leadership that has been jailed, exiled and left in disarray, young members of the Muslim Brotherhood have become difficult to control. And as the chasm between the Brotherhood's young and old has grown, it has raised fears that growing numbers of youth could turn to violence or radicalize. "Generally speaking, the older generation of Brotherhood are risk, revolution, and instability avoiders, totally unlike the young people," said Hamza Sarawy, a 24-year-old who worked in the administration of ousted Islamist president Mohammed Morsi, but is now a critic of the Brotherhood. Sarawy said young people grew disenchanted when the older Brotherhood leaders ruled in an exclusionary fashion, rather than working with non-Islamists. He also said youth were frustrated with the Brotherhood who chose to avoid direct confrontation when in power and never took on reforming state institutions like the police, which had become symbols of repression. Generation gap "They resort to half solutions rather than radical ones," said Sarawy. Many youth within the Brotherhood accuse its aging leaders of squandering their chance at power and subsequently opening the path to the bloody crackdown and harsh repression on the group's members. Thousands have died and even more have been jailed. Mass trials have become common place. Mohammed Badie faces a military tribunal on Monday Mohammed Badie, the group's 71-year-old spiritual guide who has already been sentenced to three life terms by three separate criminal courts, is set to face a military tribunal on Monday, along with 198 alleged supporters of the Muslim Brotherhood. Badie and the others are accused of vandalism, inciting violence, murder, assaulting military personnel and burning two Coptic churches in the city of Suez. "Especially post-coup, the rift [between young and old Brotherhood members] really, really widened because there was just so much blame to go around for why things ended up there," said a relative of prominent member of the Brotherhood who is currently imprisoned. The relative, who is not a member or supporter of the Brotherhood, asked to remain anonymous. Leaders living outside of Egypt admit there is a generational gap within the group, but say it's not abnormal. "I think there is the normal generational gap like in any society," said Abdullah El Haddad, who works at the Muslim Brotherhood press office in London, agreeing that the youth within the group were more willing to take risks. "The older generation of Brotherhood members is much more cautious and committing to the non-violent strategy, but all of them, they work under the same framework with the Muslim Brotherhood's ideology." Leaders in exile The groups' leaders living in exile have repeatedly said they are committed to non-violence, and condemn terrorist attacks when they occur in the country, but they admit that there are individual sympathizers and supporters that are not under their control. They blame state repression for causing the violence. "The Abdel Fattah el-Sissi regime is trying to push them to commit violent acts on the streets, but we still see weekly peaceful protests," said Haddad. "This doesn't deny the fact that there are people who think about violent acts. Unfortunately, we've seen many atrocities against the offices of the police and the army, which is a very dangerous sign." "The Brotherhood as a functional organization is never going to come out and call for violence, but they've clearly flirted with that violence and taken a more permissive attitude to violent initiatives that are taking place at a lower level on an individual basis," said Michael Wahid Hanna, a senior fellow at The Century Foundation, based in New York. "I think they've done this because, one, they probably can't control it, and two, if they were to be much more controlling, it would lead to fracturing within the organization." With nearly all senior leadership jailed or living in exile and the organization not functioning in a normal way, Hanna said the group has been forced to evolve authority downward, with localized autonomy becoming a fact of life. "This is seen as a necessary step to keep the organization functional and to stave off potential defections and people leaving," he said. "You also see this in the way in which they are dealing with the issue of violence." And dealing with the generational gap and preventing disaffected youth from turning to violence as the government's crackdown continues has taken on a new urgency after the Egyptian militant group Ansar Bayt al-Maqdis pledged allegiance to the "Islamic State" last year. Hierarchy matters El-Sissi ousted Islamist president Mohammed Morsi in July 2013 But while the generational gap within the Brotherhood has emerged as a challenge for its battered leadership, the problem is not exclusive to the group. In a country where two-thirds of the population is under 35 and successive regimes dominated by aging elites have resulted in three decades of political, economic and social stagnation, young Egyptians from the entire political spectrum have been lashing out at their parents' generation for doing nothing. "It's a hierarchical country and there is a patronizing attitude towards youth, a real rigid idea about the proper place where youth and the less experienced people fit in," said Hanna. El-Sissi's recent move to appoint new governors that included some younger figures was evidence that the government realizes to an extent that this is a problem, he said. "They've tried to compensate for this, realizing the consequences of this are bad," Hanna said.


Quadriga - Re-Importing Terror: Big Threat for Europe? Why do young people from Europe head off to fight in a religious war? How do they become radicalised? These questions have been prompted by reports that more than four hundred young Moslems from Germany have traveled to Syria and Iraq in recent months to fight in the ranks of terrorist groups. The intelligence services are warning that any who return to Europe could pose a threat to the public. Germany has announced it will send weapons and other military equipment to the Kurds in northern Iraq. Is there a danger that Jihadist fighters will try to take revenge for that decision?  Britain has already raised its threat assessment. Prime Minister David Cameron has described the Islamic State terror group as "a greater and deeper threat to our security than we’ve known before.” At least five hundred men with British citizenship are alleged to be fighting in Iraq and Syria. He also announced plans to tighten Britain's terror laws. Former members of Germany's armed forces are also reported to be among those who have made the journey to Iraq and Syria and joined the terrorists. They are especially important for groups such as the Islamic State, because many other Jihadists who have come from Germany had no previous military training. Many of them have moved back and forth across the porous, 900-kilometer long border between Turkey and Syria, which national authorities have difficulty fully controlling. How serious is the threat from these re-imported terrorists? Is it appropriate to tighten up anti-terror laws. What should Europe do in the face of this perceived danger? Let us know what you think. Send an email to quadriga@dw.de Re-Importing Terror: Big Threat for Europe? Our guests: Malte Lehming– is theeditor of the opinion page of "Der Tagesspiegel", he was the paper's Washington Bureau Chief from January 2001 to July 2005. Lehming joined "Der Tagesspiegel” in 1991 as a foreign editor, covering security issues, transatlantic relations and the Middle East. From 1989 to 1991, he served as personal assistant and speechwriter for the former German Chancellor Helmut Schmidt. Lehming completed an MA in philosophy, German Literature and European History. Hamed Abdel-Samad– is the son of a Sunni Imam. At the age of 23, the Egyptian national moved to Germany. He studied political science in Augsburg and English and French at Cairo University. After his studies, he taught at the Institute for Jewish History and Culture at the University of Munich. He has worked as a writer and journalist and made a name for himself as a critic of Islam. A death fatwa was issued against him. Once a member of the Muslim Brotherhood, in his new book Abdel-Samad now says the organization is fascist in character. Asiem El Difraoui – studied politics and economics in Cairo, London and then Paris, where he received his Ph.D. He worked as editor in chief for IP Productions, a news agency focusing on the Middle East and the Arab world. He has written numerous prize-winning documentary films and news reports. He formed part of the Middle East and Africa research group at the German Institute for International and Security Affairs, focusing on jihadist propaganda on the internet. He is currently a Senior Fellow at the Institute for Media and Communication Policy in Berlin. His latest book deals with Egyptian society after the revolution.


Egypt deeply divided over President Morsi's future The political situation in Egypt has sharply escalated, as hundreds of thousands of people demonstrate for President Morsi's ouster. Although the country is deeply divided, there's still a chance for reconciliation. The message was clear: "No Muslim Brothers allowed." Written on a flag posted in one of the streets leading to Tahrir Square, it demonstrates how little interest the opposition has in negotiating with Egypt's Islamist-leaning president, Mohammed Morsi. When the revolution broke out in January 2011, Tahrir Square was a rallying point for Egyptians from all walks of life. They were united in their demand for President Hosni Mubarak to step down. But two-and-a-half-years later, that spirit of unity has faded. The country is divided, with supporters and opponents of Morsi seemingly irreconcilable. Morsi's detractors are no longer calling on the president to implement reforms, but instead are demanding his resignation. His loyalists, on the other hand, say that he won Egypt's first free election and must finish his term in office. Role of Islam and the state Egyptians have been polarized by Morsi's politics. The Muslim Brotherhood has fallen out of public favor by imposing their vision of an expanded role for religion in state affairs, according to Gamal Soltan with the American University in Cairo. Some demonstrators have demanded that the military intervene to oust Morsi "It's a kind of a vision that wouldn't fully integrate Egyptians regardless of their religious or ideological backgrounds," Soltan told DW. The demonstrators, who first took to the streets on the anniversary of Morsi's inauguration, are articulating a general unease that broad segments of the Egyptian population have with the president's politics. Many Egyptians reject the constitution that was passed in November 2012. It's true that, in last year's referendum, two-thirds of the ballots were cast in favor of the constitution. But overall voter participation was only 33 percent. That dismally low number has many Egyptians doubting the document's legitimacy. Many of Morsi's opponents also accuse the president and his electoral base in the Muslim Brotherhood of trying to make Egypt's culture more Islamic. Culture Minister Alaa Abdel-Aziz has faced particularly harsh criticism. Shortly after assuming his post this year, he has moved to fill several influential positions with his own people, such as the head of Cairo's opera. There are fears among liberals and secularists that he could seek to restrict art on religious grounds. Economic crisis sharpens tensions In Egypt, an ideological power struggle is underway, according to Soltan. Both parties have failed to seize numerous opportunities to talk to each other. Morsi remains popular among conservative Egyptians "Groups with different ideological inclinations would have been able to reconcile and find a legal, peaceful way to settle their differences, if there is a recognition of political pluralism ... and that society has a large number of groups that all have a legitimate right to exist," Soltan said. Meanwhile, this ideological battle is escalating in part due to a worsening economic crisis. After negotiations with the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the government has agreed to implement far-reaching reforms in exchange for loans. That includes reducing subsidies and raising taxes, measures that will cost the Muslim Brotherhood support among the poorer members of Egyptian society. But politics are still the main problem, according to economist Ahmed Kamaly, also with the American University in Cairo.  "What's going to improve the economic prospects in Egypt is some kind of stability in terms of the political climate," Kamaly told DW. "Other than that, I don't see any kind of hope for the Egyptian economy." Stubborn opposition The opposition has also been the target of criticism. Morsi opponents have repeatedly rejected the president's offers of dialogue and have called instead for election boycotts. According to the liberal daily newspaper "Al-Masry Al- Youm," such behavior contributes little toward improving the country's political culture. The Muslim Brotherhood's offices have been the target of arson If one of the two opposing camps manages to win the current power struggle, they will have to resist the temptation to impose their will on their opponents, the paper said. The past months have shown that imposition achieves nothing. "Right now, Egyptians have to be critical of themselves and make the effort to forge unity and national understanding - and look seriously for an exit out of the crisis," the paper wrote In the meantime, Egypt's top military officer - General Abdel Fattah al-Sissi - has given the political leadership and the opposition until Wednesday "to fulfill the demands of the people." If that doesn't occur, then the army will make its own suggestions.


Tension rises in Egypt as Morsi supporters and opponents plan rallies Egypt's liberal and secular opposition has rejected President Mohammed Morsi's call for dialogue, calling instead for early elections. Meanwhile his Islamist supporters are planning rallies in Cairo on Friday. The opposition National Salvation Front (NSF) lashed out at President Morsi on Thursday, saying that he had failed to take responsibility for the country's deep political polarization and failed economy. Morsi had given a two-and-a-half hour televised speech the day prior, in which he acknowledged making mistakes during his year in office. The Egyptian president also called for national reconciliation, saying that he was open to cooperating with the opposition on constitutional reform. Mohamed ElBaradei, the head of the NSF, told reporters in Cairo on Thursday that the opposition "remained determined to call for an early presidential election to bring about the objectives of the revolution, with social justice foremost among them." Permalink http://p.dw.com/p/18xU7 The opposition group Tamarod (Arabic for Rebellion) has called for mass demonstrations on Sunday, June 30. The group has collected a petition with more than 15 million signatures calling for early presidential elections. Egypt faces a growing economic crisis, with rising prices and unemployment, power cuts, fuel shortages and a lack of security. Cairo also faces a looming fiscal crisis, with the country's foreign exchange reserves dwindling to dangerously low levels. Pro-Morsi rallies planned Morsi's Islamist supporters are planning rallies outside of the Rabaa al-Adawiya mosque in Cairo's Nasr City on Friday. Their slogan is "legitimacy is a red line." They argue that Morsi derives his legitimacy from winning the first free presidential election in Egypt's history last year. In his speech on Wednesday, Morsi blamed economic problems and corruption on Mubarak loyalists in the judiciary and bureaucracy. With both camps planning rallies for the weekend, tensions have reached a fever pitch. The military has moved forces near Egypt's major cities, openly threatening to intervene if Morsi supporters and opponents cannot find a compromise and avoid bloodshed. On Thursday, lethal clashes erupted in front of an office of the Freedom and Justice Party, the political wing of Morsi's Muslim Brotherhood. One person died and 30 were injured in the incident, which occurred in the northern Nile Delta province of Sharqiya. The owner of Egyptian television broadcaster CBC, Mohammed al-Amin, has been barred from leaving the country. CBC airs a popular satire show, hosted by Bassem Youssef, modeled after American comic John Stewart's the Daily Show. Youssef has himself been investigated for insulting the president and Islam. Morsi singled out al-Amin in his speech on Wednesday, saying that the businessman "wanted the return of the old regime." slk/rg (AP, AFP, Reuters)


Gulf states are buying stability in Egypt Since the Muslim Brotherhood was ousted from power in Cairo, the conservative Persian Gulf states have transferred billions of dollars to buoy up the country's economy - in the hope of maintaining stability at home. Twelve billion dollars have already been approved, and a top-up of another $2 billion was added in May. But it looks as if not even this huge sum will be enough to kick-start the faltering Egyptian economy. That led Saudi King Abdullah to call for a donor conference for Egypt, saying that "friends of Egypt" should stand by the country. The appeal is aimed primarily at the Persian Gulf states, particularly Kuwait and the United Arab Emirates, who have already joined Saudi Arabia in contributing billions of dollars worth of aid. Newly elected Egyptian President Abdel-Fattah el-Sissi urgently needs this help. The country he is governing is on the brink of total collapse. The budget deficit, according to Germany Trade and Invest, a German economic development agency, is 12.5 percent of gross domestic product. National debt stands at just under 82 percent. Unemployment is at 13 percent, and the rate of inflation comes in at 11 percent. Egypt's new president, Abdel Fattah el-Sissi, is relying on money from the Gulf to run the economy The Gulf states are investing in a country that is currently making headlines because of serious human rights abuses. The international community has strongly condemned death sentences handed down to more than 1,100 Muslim Brotherhood members in the spring, and reports by the newspaper "Egypt Independent" that around 30,000 civilians are currently being held unlawfully in Egyptian prisons. The media, too, are being put under considerable pressure. Reporters Without Borders said at least 65 journalists were imprisoned after the fall of former President Mohammed Morsi, and that at least 16 are currently in custody. The Saudi king, however, is not interested in these figures. "Prejudices against Egypt constitute prejudices against Islam and against Arab-ness," he explained when calling for the donor conference. "They also constitute a prejudice against Saudi Arabia. We will not negotiate or discuss this matter." Saudi rulers unnerved by Twitter The Saudi royal family has a considerable interest in ensuring the stability of el-Sissi's government, said Christian Koch, director of the Gulf Research Center, a Switzerland-based foundation. The Arab revolutions made the Gulf rulers very uneasy, he added, and afraid that critical voices in their own country could start to question their families' claims to power. "That is why the rulers want to regain control of events in the region as quickly as possible," he said. The Gulf states are hoping that shoring up the Sissi government will prevent unrest spreading to their homelands They have reason to be worried, according to Koch. Saudi Arabia is going through a period of upheaval. Almost half the Saudi population is under 20, while the average age in the royal family is over 60. "There's a big generational conflict going on," said Koch. This, he explained, is also being articulated via new media such as Twitter, which is used by more than 4 million Saudis. There are no taboo topics in cyberspace, and the younger generation is no longer willing to allow the government to set the limits. "It's an active discussion that will also one day lead to changes in the kingdom," Koch said. This is why the Saudi royal family hopes that el-Sissi's government will not only ensure political stability but will also maintain the ideological status quo. The Muslim Brotherhood called this into question with their social-revolutionary program - by setting up their own schools, for example, where they introduced young Egyptians with the concept of a just social order. There is no need to fear that el-Sissi and his allies will display these kinds of tendencies. In this respect, his rule contributes - indirectly at least - to tranquility in the Gulf. For his part, el-Sissi depends on support from Saudi Arabia and other Gulf states, as the Middle East expert Stephan Roll from the German Institute for International and Security Affairs (SWP) has written in a new study. "Without generous financial assistance from the United Arab Emirates (UAE), Saudi Arabia and Kuwait, Egypt would already be bankrupt," he said. Tourism is a crucial source of income for Egypt, but visitors have been staying away Investment planning But the Gulf states are not just transferring financial aid to Egypt. They are also investing there, said Roll - to the tune of more than $50 billion (37 billion euros). This would mean they have invested more than the West, whose contribution is currently $46 billion. El-Sissi wants to put this money towards some major projects that experts regard as controversial. He wants, for example, to build a million new apartments - despite the fact that a very high number of properties in Egypt are already vacant. The Sissi government does intend to invest some urgently-needed funds in the transport infrastructure. But as the International Monetary Fund (IMF) stated in a report in April, there is also an urgent need for reforms in other areas. "Improving the transparency of public-private partnerships and better public investment planning would help foster more private investment while minimizing associated fiscal risks," it said. This, however, is not the route Egypt is taking, according to Roll. There is no sign, he said, that it intends to introduce new market regulation or greater transparency in state-directed economic activity. The billions of dollars from the Arabian peninsula will help to ensure that the country remains solvent in the short term - and thus independent of Western development funds. However, Roll warned that "in view of Egypt's precarious budget and financial situation, not even the Gulf's billions will be enough to achieve an economic turnaround."


Female protesters in Egypt decry 'police' killings Protesters at a women-only rally in Cairo have demanded an investigation into the deaths of dozens of activists, saying that they were killed by security forces. The rally was held despite Egypt's crackdown on dissent. Around 100 women gathered in downtown Cairo on Thursday to protest the fatal shooting of activist and mother Shaimaa el-Sabbagh, as well as 25 other victims who were killed while attending a demonstration on Saturday in Cairo. The victims had lost their lives after police tried to break up a rally on Saturday, the eve of the fourth anniversary since the Egyptian dictator Hosni Mubarak was ousted. Saturday's protesters were on their way to place wreaths at a memorial in honor of the protesters who died during the uprising. The activists killed over the weekend were on their way to lay wreaths at a memorial in honor of protesters who died during the unrest that toppled Mubarak. Egpyt's government has denied claims that the police shot and killed El-Sabbagh, saying a forensic examination showed she was shot by a projectile that is "absolutely" not used by security forces. Still, the protesters gathered at the site of her death, chanting "The interior ministry are thugs!" and holding signs with the word "Murderer" written across pictures of the interior minister Mohamed Ibrahim. "They want the country like under Mubarak. Rotten and silent, without any talk," said el-Sabbagh's friend Yehia el-Gaafry. Since the army reclaimed power in 2013, overthrowing the Muslim Brotherhood government that followed Mubarak, public protests have been outlawed unless specifically approved by the police. The Muslim Brotherhood has also been banned and labeled a terrorist organization, as has the secular April 6 Youth Movement that was instrumental in Egypt's 2011 revolution. Hundreds, mostly Brotherhood supporters, have been killed in clashes with security services, and hundreds more have been imprisoned or sentenced to death at military tribunals since former general Abdel-Fattah el-Sissi took power. One of the organizers of Thursday's rally said that they had called for only women to participate because they feared the protest would otherwise be infiltrated by male, plainclothed agents. 'Terrorists and traitors' The protesters assembled at the site of el-Sabbagh's death near Cairo's Tahrir Square, where police armed with automatic guns have been positioned all week. A number of men also gathered across the street from the protesters, making lewd gestures and shouting profanities at them, while others expressed their support for the general-turned-president el-Sissi, and chanting "Terrorists and traitors who want to destroy the country" at the gathered women. According to Ibrahim, an investigation into el-Sabbagh's death is already underway, and the minister also promised that any police officer found responsible would be prosecuted. The rally ended peacefully and the police did not intervene, despite not conforming to restrictive government regulations on public gatherings. The government of el-Sisi has been increasingly criticized over its treatment of political opponents. At least 1,400 people have been killed in a government crackdown on dissent, after the army ousted Mohammed Morsi in the summer of 2013. dj/msh (Reuters, AP, AFP)


Calm returns to Cairo - for now The violence in Cairo has stopped. But new demonstrations have already been announced. In the meantime, the demonstrators on Tahrir Square are lauding the military and attacking the Muslim Brotherhood. Following the eruption of violence between pro-Morsi protesters and anti-Islamists on the streets of Cairo, a fragile peace has returned for the moment. Though there is a bigger police and army presence at some intersections, most of the cafes and shops are open as if nothing had happened. Families are strolling the sidewalks, and young couples are walking along the Nile. Those that fought pitched battles with supporters of the Muslim Brotherhood in recent days are only to be seen on Tahrir Square. They are mostly youths from poorer backgrounds - the upper middle classes are hardly to be seen. Violence condemned Reaction to the violence has been mixed. Some see it as a temporary eruption that will dissipate in one or two weeks. But others fear new, more serious confrontations. "I was very sad and upset by what happened yesterday," said 33-year-old Abier. "I think the Egyptians will now fight like in a civil war. It was awful." The Muslim Brotherhood has been out in force in support of the deposed Morsi A lot of people are now hoping that the police and military will keep the Islamists under control. But unless they are reintegrated into a future political system, it is likely that some will become radicalized. The new president's attempts at dialogue with the Muslim Brotherhood have so far remained fruitless. Meanwhile anti-Islamist attacks have been raining down from the pulpits on Tahrir Square. One speaker called on the crowd to prevent any members of the Brotherhood among circles of family and friends from coming to Cairo, since the size of the Islamist demonstrations is mainly down to the many Muslim Brothers coming into the city from Egypt's provinces. Nationalism and anti-Americanism Apart from attacks on the Islamists, the people on Tahrir Square are mainly motivated by a rampant nationalism coupled with anti-Americanism. "I don't want foreigners interfering in Egyptian affairs," says Ahmed. "Especially the USA. They should behave fairly to Egyptians. They should be aware of that." Protesters on Tahrir Square have been attacking the Islamists Patriotic songs are constantly ringing out on the square, with demonstrators singing along euphorically, usually holding an Egyptian flag. There are also a few "God is Great" calls to be heard, to make clear that the Muslim Brotherhood does not have a monopoly on representing Islam. Blind trust in the military The new bestseller on the square where the Egyptian revolution began is a paper portrait of current Defense Minister Abdel-Fattah el-Sissi. It costs 10 cents (7.8 euro cents) - affordable for anyone. The military has almost become an object of worship for many demonstrators. No one here doubts the integrity of the armed forces. But why did the army not intervene to stop the fighting the day before and block only one Nile bridge as the Islamists marched on Tahrir Square? Magdy, an IT specialist, dodges the question. "It's true the military only came later," he said. "But the army is spread out across Egypt - it can't be everywhere it's needed. The people defended themselves anyway." But despite all the reverence for the military, most of the demonstrators now expect democratic elections, and most also want the Islamists to take part. But that will only happen if the violence does not return in the next few days. The next major demonstrations have already been announced.


Egypt's Muslim Brothers unfazed by court ban A Cairo court has banned the Muslim Brotherhood. But Egypt's oldest Islamist organization plans to continue its protests against the military-installed government. The government of Mohammed Morsi has been toppled. Most of the Muslim Brotherhood's leaders have been thrown in jail. And on Monday, a Cairo court dealt the movement another blow Judge Mohammed al-Sayed has imposed a ban on it. The lawsuit that led to the ban claimed that the Brotherhood represented a "harm to national security." The court also ordered the group's assets seized. The Brotherhood can appeal against the ruling. Since former President Morsi was ousted by the military on July 3, the Egyptian security forces have arrested more than 2,000 members of the Muslim Brotherhood. Nearly the entire leadership of the group now sits behind bars. Many members are in hiding - they hardly dare to leave their homes. 'Revolution is getting bigger' Among them is a surgeon from a middle class neighborhood in Cairo who asked to remain anonymous. The father of a family, he has been active in the Muslim Brotherhood for years. He accuses the military government of reversing Egypt's progress: "They want to take the country back 50 or 60 years, when the Muslim Brotherhood was a banned organization and was not allowed to operate publicly. We're back in those days again." But the Islamists are continuing their peaceful demonstrations in Cairo and other major cities in Egypt. The surgeon is convinced that these protests will gain momentum in response to the court-ordered ban. "We are already considering new methods to put those responsible for the putsch under pressure and to force them to talk with us," he said. "The revolution is getting bigger. The military regime is making new enemies every day." The Muslim Brotherhood has vowed to continue demonstrating despite the ban Social services shutdown Some members of the Muslim Brotherhood believe that the ban will further damage the already crippled Egyptian economy, and eventually turn popular opinion against the military-backed government. In the past, the Muslim Brotherhood's nationwide network of social services helped fill gaps in the public welfare system, providing the poor with soup kitchens, help with finding jobs and free medicine. But since Morsi's ouster, the Brotherhood has had to shut down many of its aid programs. Not all Egyptians are upset about this. Critics have long accused the Brotherhood of using social services to buy support. "Mohammed Morsi was of no use to me," Mustafa Khaled, a strict Muslim, told DW. "He said good things, but he did nothing. I am a poor and have five kids. The Muslim Brotherhood hasn't done anything for me." The court-imposed ban is the opening act of a judicial marathon for the Brotherhood. In October, dozens of leading members of the organization will face trial, among them Mohammed Morsi. And in December, a court in Alexandria will decide whether to classify the Muslim Brotherhood as a terrorist organization. Enemy of the state Egyptian President Gamal Abdel-Nasser was the first to ban the Muslim Brotherhood in 1954, after the Islamist group fought a bloody power struggle with the army. Hosni Mubarak, who was overthrown in 2011, also threw many Brotherhood members behind bars. But overall, Mubarak granted the Brotherhood greater freedom. Under Mubarak, members were allowed to preach in mosques and run for parliament as independent candidates. Morsi will go to trial in October, along with other Brotherhood leaders After the 2011 revolution, the Brotherhood established a political wing, the Freedom and Justice Party. In March of this year, the Brotherhood registered itself as a non-government organization. But the court-imposed ban threatens to turn the Brotherhood's status as a legally permitted organization into a short intermezzo in its 85-year history. Fears of radicalization In front of a mosque in the south of Cairo, well known as a favorite meeting point for the Islamists, the ban is being heatedly discussed. A student with a long beard and wearing a white robe says he supports the Muslim Brotherhood. He starts railing against the country's new strongman, army chief Abdel Fattah el-Sissi: "It's just all a big show, organized by the intelligence agencies. El-Sissi offends our intelligence. Where is the freedom and human dignity in the things that el-Sissi does?" There is widespread concern in Egypt that factions of the Muslim Brotherhood could go underground and radicalize. In the past few weeks, there have been dozens of bloody attacks against the security forces, with more than 100 police officers left dead. At the beginning of September, a jihadist group based in the Sinai Peninsula tried to kill Interior Minister Mohammed Ibrahim with an explosive device. The assassination attempt failed.


Egypt deploys soldiers in reaction to deadly clashes Troops and armored vehicles have been sent into the city of Suez. The move came after police lost control of protests on the second anniversary of the uprising that toppled Hosni Mubarak. The Egyptian army stationed soldiers on the streets of the coastal city early Saturday morning. A few hours prior to the deployment, at least six people were killed there during clashes between police and opponents of President Mohammed Morsi. Initial reports did not indicate the number of troops sent into the city to restore peace. Throughout the day on Friday, thousands of people took to the streets across Egypt to mark the second anniversary of the day when protesters began the uprising in Tahrir Square, which eventually led to the downfall of former President Mubarak. Medical sources said that at least 476 people were injured in Friday's demonstrations. In the wake of the turbulence, Morsi released a statement on his Twitter site, asking Egyptians to "adhere to the noble principles of the Egyptian revolution in expressing opinion freely and peacefully." He had expressed a similar sentiment in a speech the day before, which had gone unheeded. Instead, protesters heard the call of opposition leaders who had asked them to express displeasure with the government of President Morsi, a former member of the Muslim Brotherhood who is backed by the Islamist movement. In Cairo, police fired tear gas into crowds of protesters who had pelted them with rocks or petrol bombs, as well as a group descending upon the presidential palace. Elsewhere in the capital city, there were reports of Morsi opponents blocking roads and metro stops. Protesters singled out government buildings in other cities, as well. In Alexandria, police were reported to have clashed with protesters who had attempted to attack a local municipal building. In the coastal city of Islamilia, Morsi opponents attacked the local Muslim Brotherhood office. The Muslim Brotherhood kept a low profile on the anniversary, calling no rallies of its own but instead announcing a charitable and social initiative it dubbed "Together we will build Egypt." The violence first broke out on Thursday when a group of protesters approached a cement wall erected to protect government buildings in Cairo. Although Morsi is the country's first democratically elected president, he has not won the trust of his opponents. Most recently, he incited the ire of the opposition when he attempted to expand his powers with a presidential decree so that he could hold a referendum on Egypt's new constitution. After voters approved the constitution, he relinquished the extra powers. The opposition rejects the constitution in its current form, arguing that it does not provide sufficient protection for human rights. kms/jm (Reuters, AFP, dpa)


Opinion: Egypt is heading back to the past Egypt's powerful army chief Abdel Fattah el-Sisi has announced he will run for president. His victory is virtually certain, but it won't lead to stability or democracy in Egypt, says DW's Rainer Sollich. An army general with sunglasses and a military hat is on his way to Egypt's highest office. For many Egyptians, this isn't a nightmare scenario but a promise for a better future. Media have dubbed this phenomenon "Sisi mania" - a carefully orchestrated personality cult somewhere along the forced-celebrity gamut between Hollywood and North Korea. The face of the former defense minister who had recently been promoted to the ranks of field marshal has not only been stamped on patriotic propaganda posters, but also on T-shirts and chocolate bars. The homage and hype around him has enabled el-Sisi to assume the pose of a dutiful servant of the state who is following the people's call: The army general puts away his military uniform in order to run in presidential elections. Right now, there is little doubt that he'll win. It's questionable whether the general is able to lead the land to a better future. Those followers who glorify him as their "savior" disregard that el-Sisi is already pulling the strings behind the scenes. Toppling former President Mohamed Morsi, the violent clampdown on protesters, death sentences for hundreds of members of the Muslim Brotherhood and the increasing repression targeting liberal, left-wing and secular activists clearly bear the hallmarks of el-Sisi. Back to the past? Even though it is somewhat understandable that the Christian minority, along with many Muslims in Egypt, regard el-Sisi as a bastion against religious extremism, ruling with an iron fist has never lead to a more stable development. It's going to deepen the ideological rift in Egypt's society and will regularly elicit new waves of violence while the economic situation is going to get worse despite prospective financial aid from Saudi Arabia. That's not only dangerous for Egypt's future - it's dangerous for the entire region. Unless el-Sisi takes on new political ideas, the path is clear: Egypt is going to relapse and head straight back to the past. It won't undo the 2011 revolution. It will simply be suspended.


Opinion: Charlie Hebdo attack challenges the roots of Western democracy The attack on the satirical French paper Charlie Hebdo reveals once again the different views held in the West and a certain section of the Islamic world about freedom of expression, writes DW's Grahame Lucas. The freedom of speech is a right which is deeply embedded in Western culture. We are taught at school how brave men and women fought against autocratic rulers in Europe over the centuries to gain us the rights of free expression and the freedoms which we enjoy and cherish today. These are the very foundations of our secular democracy, which we are committed to defend come what may. The freedom of speech is so important to us here in Europe because it provides the press with the right to watch over governments and challenge their activities where necessary. Perhaps the most famous example of the watchdog role of the media in the West was the Watergate scandal in the United States, which brought down President Richard Nixon in 1974. But there have been many other cases too, cases in which elected politicians were forced to resign for their wrongdoings after extensive media reporting. In Germany the most significant incident of this kind was the resignation of Defense Minister Franz Josef Strauss in 1962 after he abused his powers to shut down a magazine critical of his policies and lied about his actions. DW's Grahame Lucas At an individual level, the freedom of expression is vital to defend the rights of individuals to criticize government policy or anything else for that matter. And it is also at the core of everyone's right to voice political opinions or to promote his or her religious views. And logically, it is this right which lies at the heart of the discussion about human rights in general. The freedom of expression is thus rightly described as a cornerstone of democratic society. The freedom of expression is enshrined in a key ruling by the European Court of Human Rights in 1976. It reads as follows: The freedom of expression "constitutes one of the essential foundations of such a (democratic) society, one of the basic working conditions for its progress and for the development of every man. [...] It is applicable not only to ‘information' or ‘ideas' that are favorably received or regarded as inoffensive or as a matter of indifference, but also to those that offend, shock or disturb the State or any sector of the population. Such are the demands of that pluralism, tolerance and broadmindedness without which there is no ‘democratic society'." This includes criticism of religion and satirical depictions of such beliefs. In this regard, the Christian religion has been a target for many years. Christians find such satire shocking, but they have to live with it because criticism and satire are a vital part of public discourse. With regard to the interpretation of rulings in this vein, the West and parts of the Islamic world have been at odds before. There was the Fatwa issued by Ayatollah Khomeni against British writer Salman Rushdie for his 1988 book "The Satantic Verses" in which he made fun of the teachings of Islam. After threats to his life by fanatical Islamists, Rushdie lived under police protection for many years. In 2006 a Danish newspaper published satirical cartoons featuring the Prophet Muhammad. Death threats were made as well as assassination attempts. And now, the murderous attack on the satirical French paper Charlie Hebdo in which 12 people including a Muslim policeman were shot dead by two deranged Islamists. But this conflict can be overcome, of that I remain convinced. In this context, I recall the recent words of Egyptian President Abdel Fattah al-Sisi who has called for a "religious revolution" in Islam and for Muslim leaders "to fight extremism." And I would like to close this commentary with the words of a representative of Germany's Council of Muslims: In a statement, he writes that this "brutal act" by the perpetrators had ridiculed and insulted Islam and the Prophet Muhammad. "This attack is a crime against humanity and at the same time an attack on the values of Islam." That says it all. While I respect the religious beliefs of others, the freedom of the press and the freedom of expression must be paramount. Je Suis Charlie.


Trouble on the Sinai Islamist terror attacks on border guards in the Sinai Peninsula have shocked Egypt, where the government may use them as an occasion to reform security systems in the area. Sixteen Egyptian border guards were shot dead on August 5, as they were about to perform their nightly Ramadan prayers. The terrorists killed them in a surprise attack, took their vehicles and drove to the Karm Abu Salem checkpoint and began firing into Israeli territory. Since the crossing was not far from the Gaza Strip, Israel at first suspected the Palestinian group Hamas of being behind the attack. But the gunmen later shot dead by Israeli soldiers proved to be Egyptians. For both Israeli and Egyptian military leaders, this fact only made clearer how precarious the security situation is on the border between the two countries. Sixteen Egyptian border guards were killed by their Islamist compatriots in the attack History of violence There have been a number of attacks on the Sinai Peninsula before, though usually in its southern half – where the tourist industry is concentrated. A particularly brutal attack was carried out in 2004, when 34 people were killed at a hotel near the Israeli beach resort of Eilat. A year later Islamist extremists killed eight tourists at the Sharm el-Sheikh resort in Egypt, while another 23 people died in a series of coordinated bomb attacks in 2006. Attacks on the gas-pipeline from Egypt to Israel became more frequent after the outbreak of the Egyptian revolution, and this August terrorists also attacked a bus near Eilat, killing eight Israelis. Smuggling between the northern Sinai and Gaza has also increased since the revolution began. In July, US secret services indicated the presence of "criminal networks with possible connections to terrorist groups in the region," and they offered a significant detail – business crimes and terrorism can no longer be separated in the region. Precarious security The dangerous situation on the peninsula has long been known, says Palestinian journalist and political scientist Khaled Hroub. He says it dates back to the Camp David peace agreement signed between Israel and Egypt in 1979, which stipulated that there be only a limited Egyptian military presence in the border region. "Since then only a few hundred Egyptian soldiers have been guarding a huge area," he says. "It's an impossible task. These incidents could easily have happened earlier." There have been attacks on Israeli tourists in Eilat Hroub added that such attacks could repeat themselves soon. "What is needed is a paradigm shift that gives Egypt greater power on military and security questions," he says. Hroub is convinced that such an agreement would counter the smuggling problem in the northern Sinai, which he also blames on the Camp David deal. Since the government cannot adequately control and protect the area, he argues, they care very little for the wellbeing of its inhabitants, who consequently suffer massive unemployment and poverty. "Because of that, huge frustration and anger towards the Egyptian government have built up in the northern Sinai over the past 30 years," says Hroub. "These people have been left to fend for themselves." For this reason, one section of the population has taken two available options – smuggling into the Gaza Strip to solve their economic problems, and radical Islam, which offers spiritual guidance for the desperate population. After several decades of militancy in the region, Islam in the northern Sinai has taken on extremist tendencies. Competition for Hamas That's why, explains Hroub, Hamas is also unhappy with the presence of Egyptian extremists on the border with Gaza, which is why the Palestinian group played an important role in securing the border – he believes Hamas fears the Islamists just as much as Egyptian and Israeli authorities. The violence is set to continue in the Sinai Peninsula "Israel and Egypt fear these groups for their terrorist attacks," he says. "For Hamas, meanwhile, they are competitors in their own backyard. These groups carry out their acts in the name of Islam, just as Hamas does. On top of that, it also supports the Palestinian cause." Israel is being forced to recognize that its southern border is becoming less and less secure, which is why it is currently investing in massive reinforcements of it, and Israelis are also following political developments in Egypt more closely. The dismissal of Defense Minister Hussein Tantawi and Chief of Staff Sami Annan did at first cause consternation in Israel, said Günter Meyer, director of the Center for the Study of the Arab World at the University of Mainz. There was some relief when it emerged that their successors were also established members of the army. At the same time, says Meyer, Israelis are aware of how difficult the relationship with Egypt remains. "Israel's reputation is so ruined among the Egyptian population it can hardly even hope to improve its negative image through some positive gestures." Rebuilding the security system What is clear, says Hroub, is that the security situation at the Israeli-Egyptian border will now almost certainly change. The horror sparked by the attack on the border guards is expected to prompt the government to take matters into its own hands. "I expect Morsi and his government will use the incidents as an occasion to alter the entire security system in the Sinai desert – whether unilaterally or in cooperation with Israel."


Saudi Arabia names Muslim Brotherhood as terror group Saudi Arabia has listed the Muslim Brotherhood and a number of other groups as terrorist organizations. The Brotherhood has been the target of many Gulf nations since Egypt's Mohammed Morsi was ousted last July. Friday's announcement appeared to enforce the findings of a royal decree last month, in which Riyadh promised to punish those who fight in conflicts outside the kingdom, or join or support extremist groups. A list published by the official Saudi Press Agency lists as terrorist organizations the Muslim Brotherhood, the Al-Nusra front - al Qaeda's official Syrian affiliate - as well as the branches of al Qaeda in Yemen and Iraq, Saudi Hezbollah and Yemen's Shiite Hawthis. The interior ministry said it would prosecute anyone backing these groups "financially or morally," or who express sympathies for or promote them. Saudi Arabia also forbade citizens from fighting in conflict zones, giving Saudis fighting abroad a 15-day ultimatum to return home or face imprisonment. The decrees on Friday represent an escalation against the Brotherhood of ousted Islamist Egyptian president Mohammed Morsi, with Riyahd fearful the group has tried to build support inside the kingdom since the Arab Spring revolutions. The Brotherhood's Sunni Islamist doctrines challenge the Saudi principle of dynastic rule. There is also concern in Riyadh over the potential domestic security risks of Saudi extremists fighting in Syria. The Saudi interior ministry estimates around 1,200 Saudis have gone to Syria to fight, heightening worries that fighters could become radicalized and then return to Saudi Arabia and turn their weapons on the monarchy. Riyadh, however, strongly supports some rebel opposition groups with weapons and aid, in their battle to overthrow Syrian President Bashar al-Assad. Pressure on Qatar Saudi Arabia's move against the Muslim Brotherhood is likely to heap pressure on Qatar, whose backing of the group and others Islamist organizations in the region has caused a row with fellow Gulf monarchies. It comes two days after Saudi Arabia, Bahrain and the United Arab Emirates recalled their ambassadors from Qatar. The three said Doha had not stuck by an accord not to interfere in each others' internal affairs. Egypt formally declared the Muslim Brotherhood a terrorist organization in December. The group has been the target of a deadly crackdown since Morsi's army-led ouster. jr/ph (AFP, AP, Reuters)


Opinion: Tunisia is a model for what the Arab Spring can achieve The election of political veteran Essebsi as Tunisia's first ever democratic president is a vital milestone on the way to the establishment of a true Arab democracy, says DW's Loay Mudhoon. The election of Beji Caid Essebsi as the first democratically elected president in Tunisia's history is an historic achievement - not only for the North African country, but also for all Arab nations currently in transition. This successful and surprisingly peaceful election marks the end of a difficult democratic transition in the motherland of the Arab Spring revolts. At the same time, it confirms the pioneering role that Tunisia has automatically played in a region scarred by post-revolutionary chaos, the collapse of states and the reform blockades set up by the incapable and authoritarian governing elites. Who thought Tunisia would have it so hard? The transition from the long-term dictatorship of Zine El Abidine Ben Ali to a democratic future was not supposed to be so difficult. Of all the post-revolutionary Arab states, Tunisia had the best conditions for making a successful journey to democracy and the rule of law. The country has a relatively strong civil society, a confident women's movement, good domestic negotiating bodies, like the Tunisian General Labor Union (UGTT), a relatively good education system and a well-functioning administration. On top of that, the military has rarely acted as a political body. In addition, after the departure of Ben Ali in 2011 the transition began promisingly. Following the first democratic elections for the assembly that would formulate the new constitution in October 2011, the victors agreed surprisingly quickly to a coalition government and an even distribution of the most important offices. Loay Mudhoon, Arab world analyst for DW Egypt, a scary model But starting in October 2012, the transformation process began to stagnate. Tunisians waited in vain for the promised constitution. Social and political polarization worsened, particularly after the murder of opposition politician Chokri Belaid. But dramatic events in Egypt showed Tunisia's post-revolutionary elites where extreme polarization and ideological turf battles would lead. In July 2013, following days of mass protests, the Egyptian military toppled the democratically elected Islamist President Mohammed Morsi, and summarily banned his Muslim Brotherhood - the parent organization of political Islam. That was followed by an almost complete restoration of the old Mubarak regime. Since then, the country has been regularly shaken by terrorist attacks. Economic and social crises have worsened and are threatening to make the country ungovernable. Learning from the mistakes of the Muslim Brotherhood Of course, one couldn't expect the heavy legacy of dictatorship to be overcome without fierce social confrontation. But the way in which Tunisians have negotiated a new understanding of the state and a freely-negotiated social model has been decisive. The Islamist Ennahda movement learned from the mistakes of the Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt, overwhelmed and out of touch with reality as they were, and chose a true national dialogue. They acted pragmatically in the constitutional process and decided against including Islamist references in the constitution. That meant that all political forces could agree on what is, in effect, the most progressive constitution in the Middle East, one which enshrines a balance between secular and religious citizens. Now Essebsi must act Now President-elect Essebsi and his secular-nationalist Nida Tounes party face major challenges. The country desperately needs to stabilize the security situation and implement far-reaching reforms in the security sector, as well as boost the economy which has been on its knees since the fall of Ben Ali nearly four years ago. In order to achieve this, Essebsi, who relied on the networks of the old regime in his election campaign, must effectively include the more pragmatic and solution-oriented Islamists in his program, particularly in his efforts to battle Tunisia's ticking time bomb: high unemployment. Otherwise, there is serious danger that Tunisia's youth will lose faith in the aims and achievements of the revolution - and distance themselves from this new, hard-fought social order.


Morsi answers awkward questions in Berlin Mohammed Morsi had little time to spare during his visit to Berlin after his talks with Chancellor Angela Merkel, but he did find space in his schedule for a speech - and some awkward questions. It was a sophisticated audience that had come to hear the speech of Egyptian President Mohammed Morsi - around 200 diplomats, academics, politicians, and students filled a large hall in the Körber Foreign Policy Forum in Berlin. They waited patiently for the president, who arrived very late for his last appointment in the German capital. When the 61-year-old finally arrived, after a long day of political discussions, he cut a proud, self-confident figure. Democratically elected He called himself Egypt's first democratically elected, civilian president, and added that he was speaking from a position of true legitimacy, bestowed on him by the Egyptian people in free elections. But he added that the presidential elections had merely been the first step on the path to the establishment of a civilian state. His aim, he said, was to build up Egypt, both economically and socially. Morsi made the speech after his talks with Angela Merkel Morsi underlined that the 2011 revolution, which ended the regime under Hosni Mubarak, was a source of self-confidence for his country. "The revolution did not break out in a moment of rage, and it wasn't a 'spring,' and not an awakening from a long sleep," he said. "This revolution, like the other revolutions in the region, was much more the result of national movements and the expression of the hopes of whole generations." Equal dialogue The president also accused Western governments of supporting the dictatorial regimes in the Arab world for decades, a policy that had had immoral and inhumane results. For the future, he demanded a dialogue between equal partners. "Neither side must presume to offer the other advice, or claim that their side has all the wisdom, or believe that they stand above the other," he said. Within Egypt too, he said his aim was to engage in a dialogue between social groups, and to find the widest national consensus possible. He said that Cairo would once again play a leading role in the region in the search for peace and stability. By that token, he called for dialogue in Syria, where the bloodletting, he said, must be ended, as well as in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. He argued that the Palestinians had a right to self-determination within their own state, that the Israeli occupation was illegal, and that the Palestinians had the right to defend themselves against it. There were anti-Morsi protests in Berlin Awkward questions After the half-hour speech, Morsi was questioned by Georg Mascolo, journalist from news magazine Der Spiegel, who had moderated the evening. The president remained impassive when Mascolo brought up a video that had recently emerged in which Morsi was recorded making anti-Israeli statements, and drawing comparisons to pigs and monkeys. The president contended that his remarks had been taken out of context, and that they had been part of a discussion of violent Israeli policies. He said it was unacceptable for Israel to spill the blood of Palestinian children, but that he had not intended to attack the Jewish people or Judaism, and that he respected all religions. Morsi evaded a question on a ban on alcohol and bikinis. He said that religious freedom governed Egypt, where anyone could do what he or she wanted as long as they did not harm others. Morsi also rejected statements by the German government's human rights commissioner Markus Löning, who had recently complained that the human rights situation in Egypt was worse than it had been before the revolution. This, Morsi said, was untrue - he admitted that there had been some violations, but that the government would not tolerate them. Egypt, he pointed out, was still in a transitional phase, and needed patience. Morsi returned to Cairo on Wednesday evening, having declared that he must fulfil his many duties at home. But he offered some reassuring words on his departure: Egypt, he insisted, was not about to collapse.


Sissi set for landslide victory with large majority in presidential election Former army chief Abdel-Fattah al-Sissi has captured more than 90 percent of the votes in Egypt's presidential election, according to unofficial results. Polling had been extended an extra day due to low turnout. With early results coming in after voting ended on Wednesday, Sissi had garnered 93.4 percent of the vote, his campaign team said in a statement. Private television channel CBC, meanwhile, reported Sissi was winning 97 percent of the vote in the first 2,000 counting centers. Sissi, the ex-army chief who orchestrated the coup to oust former President Mohammed Morsi last July, is had long been expected to handily defeat leftist challenger Hamdeen Sabahi. Authorities chose to keep voting booths open an extra day after turnout on Monday and Tuesday was far below what Sissi had called for. Estimates by pro-Sissi media said 38 to 44 percent of the country's 53 million eligible voters had gone to the polls, far below the 52 percent who elected Morsi, Egypt's first democratically elected leader, in 2012. There were fireworks in Cairo as the results began to come through, with celebrations lasting into the early hours of Thursday morning. About 1,000 people gathered in Tahrir Square, the symbolic heart of 2011's popular uprising that toppled Hosni Mubarak. Voter participation low Sissi had called on "40, 45 [million] or even more" of the country's voters to participate, "show the world" and lend credibility to an election that was boycotted by Morsi's Muslim Brotherhood and secular opposition groups. The low turnout, however, has directed more criticism at an election Sissi and his supporters had hoped would show the government's harsh crackdown on the Brotherhood and other dissenters had been the will of the Egyptian people. After the meager numbers the first two days, many polling stations were nearly deserted on Wednesday. "The state is searching for votes" read a headline on the front page of Al-Masry Al-Youm, a newspaper usually sympathetic to Sissi. Egypt's military-appointed interim government had spent weeks growing support for Sissi and portraying him as the man to guide the country out of its current economic crisis. High unemployment, inflation and overall economic instability have plagued Egypt in the years since longtime strongman Hosni Mubarak was overthrown in February 2011. Low turnout welcomed The Muslim Brotherhood hailed the low turnout in the controversial vote. "The great Egyptian people have given a new slap to the military coup's roadmap and … written the death certificate of the military coup," said the Islamist group's political arm, the Freedom and Justice Party. The Brotherhood has been the target of a massive crackdown by the government since Morsi's ouster. Hundreds of its supporters have been killed in clashes with security forces, the group has been designated a "terrorist organization" and many of its main leaders are either in jail or exile. Morsi himself is currently being tried on charges that could carry the death penalty. Prominent secular and youth activists that played a key role in the 2011 revolution also boycotted this week's vote, saying Sissi was another autocrat in the mold of Mubarak. Since the July 3 coup to unseat Morsi, the government crackdown on the Brotherhood and other Islamists has caused some of the worst bloodshed in Egypt's recent history. Sissi, meanwhile, has said bringing "true democracy" to the country will take a couple of decades. dr, jr/jm (AFP, AP)


Cairo's foreign media bloodied but unbowed The sentencing of three Al Jazeera English journalists has sent shock waves through the Cairo foreign press corps, where journalists say a xenophobic atmosphere had already reigned. For foreign journalists in Egypt, the sentences that turned their colleagues into the story has brought a looming sense of sadness, anger and dismay. "At that point, you didn't really want to be a journalist, you didn't want to be reporting anything, you just felt extreme sadness, you felt destroyed," said Sherine Tadros, a correspondent for Sky News, of the moment she heard the verdict in court. "We were reporting the story, but they were our friends." "It sent a message that journalists should toe the line of the government or else this politicized judicial system will be used against you," said Sherif Mansour, the Middle East and North Africa Coordinator at the Committee to Protect Journalists about the verdicts. Evidence presented by the prosecution in court included a news conference from Kenya, a BBC documentary from Somalia which won Greste a Peabody Award, footage of sheep and trotting horses aired by Sky News Arabia, images of Peter Greste's parents on holiday in Germany and Latvia, and the pop song "Somebody I use to know," by Belgian-Australian artist Gotye. The prosecution asserted they had further evidence but that it could not be shown because they did not have the proper equipment to play it in court. Flimsy evidence "It's an objective fact to say that there is no evidence at all that suggests that these guys have endangered national security or belong to the Brotherhood, there is nothing of that that we saw in court," Patrick Kingsley, the Guardian's Egypt correspondent who attended all but one session of the trial, told DW. "The feeling that they are being convicted on the same kind of reporting that the rest of us have been doing is quite a chilling thought." Fahmy, an award-winning journalist who previously worked for CNN and the New York Times, had spent less than two months as Al Jazeera English's Cairo bureau chief at the time of their arrests in December from Cairo's Marriott Hotel. Greste, an award-winning journalist who had previously worked for the BBC, had flown in from Kenya to fill in for a colleague on leave during the Christmas holidays and had spent only 10 days reporting in Egypt. Rena Netjes had no ties to Al Jazeera Three other foreign journalists were found guilty and sentenced to 10 years in absentia. Among them was Dutch journalists Rena Netjes, who has never worked for Al Jazeera, but was implicated after she had tea with Fahmy at the hotel just days before his arrest. Netjes was able to escape with the assistance of the Dutch embassy, partly because her name was unrecognizably misspelled and her passport number incorrect on court documents. Others defendants in the case claimed they have no connection to Al Jazeera, including students and the head of an Islamic charity. The only two defendants acquitted were a student, Ahmed Abdel-Hamid, and in an ironic twist, Anas el-Beltagy, the son of Muslim Brotherhood leader Mohamed el-Beltagy who was sentenced to death last week by Judge Nagy. Random and without restraint The verdict, coming on the heels of mass death sentences of hundreds of alleged supporters of the now-banned Muslim Brotherhood, stoked fears among journalists that courts are acting without restraint. "Truly scary bit from [Al Jazeera trial] verdict? I really do believe nobody is telling Egypt judges to act like this," tweeted Ashraf Khalil, a Cairo-based Egyptian-American journalist and contributor to Time Magazine. Fears of growing media repression were compounded when a Coptic Christian journalist who was arrested while reporting on sectarian violence in April was sentenced to five years prison on the same day the Al Jazeera verdict was handed down, and the conviction on Wednesday of another journalist who had worked for an Islamist media. "Journalist Abdel Rahman Shaheen arrested on street in Suez on 9 April sentenced to 3 years in prison. Who's next?" tweeted Shahira Amin, a freelance Egyptian journalist, about the arrest. "Everyone," commented Erin Cunningham, a Cairo-based correspondent for the Washington Post, in response to Amin's question. Sticking together According to the Committee to Protect Journalists, Egypt is currently holding at least 14 journalists in prison, placing the country among the top ten jailers of journalists in the world. Beyond fears of arrest, many journalists say their ability to work freely in Egypt has been constrained by a hostile climate on the streets provoked by Egyptian media. Hostile climate "I am reluctant to go to public spaces and identify myself as a foreign journalist, unless it's absolutely necessary," said Borzou Daragahi, Middle East and North Africa correspondent for the Financial Times. "This is caused by the atmosphere of hysteria against foreigners and journalists whipped up by state media and private channels owned by the military regime's courtiers." Following the sentencing of the Al Jazeera journalists on Monday, Egyptian media justified the verdict by claiming the defendants were not actual journalists because they worked for Al Jazeera. One Egyptian presenter, Ibrahim Eissa, defended the sentences on air despite having been prosecuted for his work as a journalist under former autocrat Hosni Mubarak. "The most riveting aspect of the climate in Egypt at the moment is the Egyptian media itself," said Kingsley. "There is so much incitement against foreign journalists on television and in the rest of the media that it doesn't take much, just one person getting suspicious and in the process turning the whole street against you and maybe nearby police." Kingsley added that the threat was not new and that swathes of foreign journalists had been temporarily detained in the months since the July coup. Kingsley said he had also been followed and watched at his home in an obvious manner by who he believes were state agents. Muzzled but motivated Standing tall But while journalists say the hostile atmosphere has caused more caution, they also say state intimidation has not pressured them to toe the government's line. "We are all cautious about our movements and actions on the street and in public spaces, but we are not pulling our punches in reporting," said Daragahi. "The atmosphere is fairly typical of Arab police states." And for others, the attempt to silence the media has become motivation. "On the one hand I am fearful, on the other hand, there is a lot of resolve that comes when you feel there is such a need to tell the real story," said Tadros who worked in Egypt under Mubarak, during the 2011 revolution, and during Morsi's rule and said press freedom was worse now than ever before. "The fact is, no one else is criticizing or holding the government accountable, the local media definitely is not, so we have to also continue to do our jobs or else nobody will."


Muslim Brotherhood's Morsi says no stability in Egypt until coup overturned Mohammed Morsi has said Egypt will have no stability "without removing consequences of the coup" that unseated him. The army ousted Egypt's first democratically elected president after protests against his one-year rule. Morsi's lawyer, Mohammed al-Damati, told reporters that the former president still considers himself Egypt's leader. On November 4, a court opened Morsi's trial on charges of inciting the killing of opposition protesters outside the presidential palace in December. "Egypt will not recover without removing the consequences of the coup and holding to account those responsible for shedding Egyptians' blood," Morsi said in the statement, read out on his behalf by Damati, who had visited him in prison on Tuesday. Morsi took power as Egypt's first democratically elected president after the country's 2011 revolution led to the ouster of the autocrat Hosni Mubarak. During the summer, Morsi's July 3 overthrow triggered mass protests and street violence in Egypt, leaving hundreds dead. Over the ensuing months, a fierce crackdown by security forces has crippled Morsi's Muslim Brotherhood, led to the arrests of several thousand top leaders, and the deaths of hundreds of protests. A court order banned the Brotherhood and a government-appointed committee has begun reviewing its financial assets with an eye to seize them. The interim military-backed government has pushed ahead with a transition plan aiming for new presidential and parliamentary elections early next year. 'Crime and treason' Ahead of his trial, the interim government had kept Morsi incommunicado in an undisclosed location. Officials moved Morsi to a high-security civilian penitentiary last week after the first session of his trial on charges of inciting murder. On Tuesday, he had his first extensive meeting with a team of lawyers from his Muslim Brotherhood and other allies, dictating the "message to the Egyptian people" to them. Morsi's trial will resume on January 8. If convicted, he could face a life sentence or the death penalty. "This coup is a crime and treason," Damati quoted Morsi as saying. "I see this coup starting to collapse." Security officials worry protests could flare stronger with Thursday's anticipated lifting of a state of emergency and curfew imposed on August 14. Ahead of the lifting, the government announced in a statement that it had reviewed security plans, which include increasing police deployments such as mobile and fixed checkpoints in the streets. "Any attempts to destabilize the country or undermine state or citizen's security will be dealt with firmly in accordance with the law," the statement read. mkg/dr (Reuters, AFP, dpa, AP)


Egypt's opinion leaders using social media No medium matches Facebook and Twitter for quickly spreading information during crisis situations, such as in Egypt. But there are dangers with everyone sharing their own version of the truth. Sami Magdy describes how the Egyptian news portal Masrawy receives dozens of emails daily with photo and video material from the press bureaus of the military and the Muslim Brothers. "Our accounts are overflowing - both sides are trying to influence our coverage," said Magdy, who is the portal's editor-in-chief. This battle has also largely been playing out over social media. Since Morsi was removed from power, pro-Morsi Muslim Brothers and Morsi opponents have been engaged in a verbal war, above all on the social network Facebook and the micro-blogging service Twitter. Facebook and Twitter for politicians But it's not only citizens discussing amongst themselves. Anna Antonakis-Nashif, a political scientist who researches social media in the Arab world at the German Institute for International and Security Affairs in Berlin, said that Internet discussions in Egypt have become more strongly led by political party interests since the 2011 revolution. "Political representatives have recognized Facebook and Twitter as important, powerful tools," she said. The Egyptian military as well as the Muslim Brotherhood already in the 2011 revolution opened their own Twitter and Facebook accounts. According to the "Arab Social Media Report" and the website Internetworldstats.com, total Facebook users in Egypt alone nearly doubled from April 2011 to December 2012, from 6.5 million to more than 12 million. The Muslim Brothers tweet in English as well Images of blood-drenched demonstrators and videos of shootings and street fighting between security personnel and Islamists have also been circulating on social networks. One such video is of Ahmed Samir Assem. In it, a shooter fires numerous shots from a roof, then turns his weapon toward the camera - and then the video abruptly ends. The video was posted on the Web and went on to become the subject of numerous articles. In it, Assem apparently filmed his own death. The 26-year-old photojournalist worked for the official newspaper of the Freedom and Justice Party, the political arm of the Muslim Brotherhood. The video was supposed to demonstrate how military sharpshooters shot Assem this past Monday (08.07.2013). According to official figures, on this day alone, 51 people were killed and 435 more injured in clashes between Islamists and the military. But it's difficult to reconstruct exactly what happened on that day, based on the video. A video by the Muslim Brotherhood honoring Assem has also made the rounds online via the Twitter account @Ikhwanweb (Ikhwan is Arabic for brother). It shows photos to music and ends with a close-up of Assem's corpse and the blood-smeared camera. The military's response was not long in coming - it, too, published videos via Facebook and Twitter. In one, a general threatens to imprison anyone who incites people. In another, a man in black clothing and a black facemask is shown targeting security personnel. There was no arbitrary shooting - the military was just defending itself, the message was. Yet it's never clear from the videos who started the clash. Verifying videos Antonakis-Nashif explained how such videos present the problem of being difficult to filter. "Users post photos and videos to mobilize followers, very quickly updating their pages," she said. Magdy is familiar with this problem, as well. One editor with the portal has the job of reviewing such material. There are plenty of fakes used for propaganda purposes - for example, photos of dead children recently circulated by the Muslim Brotherhood intended to show how the Egyptian military killed with impunity. It was quickly established that the children in the photos were Syrian. Reaching international media There are plenty of English-language tweets used by citizens, the military or Muslim Brothers, for example under the hashtags #military_coup, #police_state, #morsi and #muslimbrother. Such English entries "serve the international public," Antonakis-Nashif said, including diaspora communities or international media. Users of the DW Facebook pages in various languages have attempted as well to use the sites to share photos and videos of violent scenes of conflict in Egypt. It appears the moderate voices have little space in today's social networks. Take the website "We are all Khaled Said," which was created after the killing of a food stand worker in Alexandria by police in 2010 and played a major role in mobilizing Egyptians during the 2011 revolution. When administrators urged users to remain neutral after Morsi's deposition, they responded with a storm of indignation. Antonakis-Nashif said that online debates, though often nuanced, can also reinforce the opinions of users as they choose feeds that fit with their views. And this can polarize split societies even further.


Egypt: "Media is a propaganda machine." The power struggle in Egypt is also being fought in the media. At a discussion held by DW Akademie and the broadcaster ARD, experts looked at how the country's political situation is affecting the work of journalists. "The Egyptian media has never been free. It wasn't under Mubarak, it wasn't under Morsi and isn't free now," said Mazen Hassan. The journalist took part in the "International Media" discussion round held at the ARD broadcasting house in Berlin. DW reporter and presenter, Jaafar Abdul-Karim, hosted the event. Mazen Hassan, correspondent for Al-Ahram Mazen Hassan is the Germany-based correspondent for Egypt's Al-Ahram newspaper. Given Egypt's current political situation he said the media is little more than a "propaganda machine", with many journalists allowing themselves to be manipulated by the country's respective power holders. Being based in Germany, he said he is arguably less under this influence than some of his colleagues. However after the overthrow of president Mohammed Morsi, Hassan wrote an article about reactions in Germany and also quoted Morsi supporters. His editor chose not to run the story. She is a supporter of the interim government and instead ran a piece about Egyptians abroad celebrating the revolution. There was no space for pro Morsi opinion, she told him.  Jürgen Stryjak, a Cairo-based ARD radio correspondent, is aware that journalists are being exploited and says that at present the media is tending towards favorable coverage of the armed forces chief and Defense Minister, Abdel Fattah al-Sisi. "Some journalists support this kind of reporting and others go along with it simply to avoid reprisals. And although there are also unbiased journalists this is not an easy time for them."  Raniah Salloum, Middle East editor and reporter for Spiegel Online, says many of her Egyptian colleagues are uncertain, not sure of how far they can go in their reporting. "This," she said, "inevitably leads to self-censorship." Jürgen Stryjak agreed. The new anti-terrorism and demonstration laws are so vaguely worded that they automatically silence a lot of critics, he said. "I see this as a major threat to the country's media environment."  Distrust of foreign journalists Stryak is facing challenges of a different type. It has become increasingly difficult to extend his residency permit because foreign correspondents are seen as portraying Egypt in a negative light. Anonymous callers have already accused him of this. It has also become difficult to find interviewees. "Things have changed," he said. "People used to be quite open and willing to talk to me but since Morsi was overthrown they've become wary of us."  Raniah Salloum has had similar experiences. Although she can still move about freely in Cairo she finds that the atmosphere can be tense during interviews. "I've had to cancel interviews more than once because mobs had formed around me," she said. Jürgen Stryjak, Cairo-based radio correspondent Although Mazen Hassan confirmed there is a general mistrust towards foreign journalists he pointed out that not all German media are providing balanced coverage. He said reports of Mohammed Morsi's ouster, for example, indicated that this was primarily a military achievement and tended to ignore efforts made by the Egyptians themselves. Jürgen Stryjak agreed, saying this was the reason he never uses the word "coup" or the term "Arab Spring" in his reports. "Labels like this aren't part of objective reporting," he said. He’s particularly critical of news agencies which tend to focus on minor conflicts. He pointed to an otherwise peaceful street festival where there had been a skirmish between police and demonstrators. The news wires reported this as "Street battles at anti-Morsi protests" - in his view a distortion of the facts.  As for additional challenges facing the Egyptian media Mazan Hassan pointed to journalists being poorly trained. He credited DW Akademie for contributing to advanced training for media workers and praised the projects being conducted. However, given the low salaries, he said, journalism isn't held in particularly high regard and many journalists therefore aim for permanent positions with state-controlled media organizations. Their motivation has little to do with advocating impartial reporting, he said. But he admitted that this in itself was a challenge. "You can still be prosecuted for expressing an opinion," he said. "What we really need is to first get a sense that we're living in a democracy." Efforts are being made: there are plans to strengthen freedom of the press in the new constitution and discussions are underway to convert the current state media outlets into private media organizations. However the parliamentary and presidential elections are yet to take place and the type of media policy the new government will ultimately choose remains unclear.   DW Akademie's department for Strategic Communications, together with the German broadcaster ARD, has held regular Media International discussions since December 2011. Each expert discussion focuses on a specific country. The goal is to offer media professionals - and others interested in the media - views on media development in various countries as well as a look at journalists' working conditions there. To date discussions have focused on Azerbaijan, DR Congo/Rwanda, Colombia, Mali, Myanmar, Pakistan, Sudan/South Sudan, Syria and the Ukraine.


Libya: Chronology of a collapsing state Three years after the death of Moammar Gadhafi, Libya is marching toward civil war. The dream of a new start has given way to political anarchy - and most of the country's problems are self-inflicted. The young revolutionaries weren't themselves. They couldn't possibly be; they had been drugged by Islamist militias of the terrorist network al Qaeda. That's what Moammar Gadhafi claimed at any rate, as he faced the first protests against his 40-year regime in January and February 2011. The revolutionaries vehemently denied his accusations. But that did not stop Gadhafi from striking back at the spreading protests with all his might. Dozens of people lost their lives. The months that followed only sharpened the conflict, particularly in the east of the country, in the province of Cyrenaica, where the rebels took power. They tried to march on the West but were beaten back by Gadhafi's army. In March, Gadhafi launched his first major offensive. The resulting public cries for help were heard by the international community, and on March 17, the UN Security Council adopted Resolution 1973, demanding an immediate ceasefire and end to attacks on civilians. To enforce the demands, the resolution also provided for the establishment of a no-fly zone and the use of military means. Any political solution, however, should have taken into account the "legitimate demands of the Libyan people." Before the vote, Russia proposed that the UN Security Council should first agree on a single resolution calling for a ceasefire in Libya. This proposal was rejected by the majority of the Council's members. Islamist groups like Ansar al-Sharia are a threat to Libyan stability At the end of March, NATO overtook management of the so-called Unified Protector mission. NATO-led attacks continued until the end of October 2011. One of the last cities to escape the fighting was Sirte, Gadhafi's birthplace. It was there, on October 20, that he was captured by the rebels while attempting to flee. They executed him with a shot to the head. Despite continuing clashes between Gadhafi supporters and rebels, an election was called for a constitutional assembly in June 2012. Those elected to what became the collective General National Congress were the highest parliamentary group in the land for two years. In August 2014, after a new parliamentary election, they were meant to be replaced by a House of Representatives. Tribes and militias demand a share of power But in the first few weeks of the General National Congress, a problem surfaced that affects Libya to this day: the tribes and militias that fought against Gadhafi during the revolution were not willing to be subsumed under state power and the rules of democratic fair play. Instead they each demanded a share of power for themselves. There were a wide variety of coalitions in which material interests and ideological motives connected in ways that are difficult to follow. As a result, old Sufi shrines destroyed in the summer of 2012. Libyan journalist Mustafa Fetouri called it the work of radical Islamists. "This type of violence can only be the work of fanatical groups who have ties to al Qaeda or another terrorist network," Fetouri told DW. 'Into the abyss!' The democratically elected Libyan Parliament now meets in Tobruk, east of Tripoli Islamist groups have allied themselves with former Gadhafi supporters. Such a group was behind the deadly attack on American Ambassador Chris Stevens in September 2012 . "Where do these people want to drive Libya?" asked the online newspaper Al watan al Libya, to which the paper itself gave the answer: "Into the abyss!" The struggles continue today, along constantly changing fronts. Earlier this year, on May 18, Zintan Brigade units, led by General Khalifa Haftar and no longer monitored by the state, attacked the Parliament. They temporarily occupied it, but were soon forced to retreat. At the same time, other units loyal to Haftar fought against Islamist groups in Benghazi. Members of the government, Parliament and representatives of the Libyan army issued a joint statement in which they accused Haftar of attempting a coup. Fight against Islamists and jihadists Since June, armed Islamists, whose political representatives had only moderate success in the elections that month, have been attempting to bring Tripoli under their control. Following their assault, they declared that only their representatives will constitute the Parliament. For safety reasons, the elected Libyan Parliament has relocated to the coastal town of Tobruk, 1,000 kilometers (621 miles) east of Tripoli. The Egyptian military launched a series of strikes against Islamist targets in Tripoli From there, Libyan MPs have asked the United Nations to help prevent the country's total collapse. "That's a confession from this democratically oriented group that man is political until the end," former Austrian military attache Wolfgang Pusztai told DW. Libya did get some help from neighboring Egypt, as Egyptian military aircraft fired on Islamists positions in Tripoli. At the same time, they flew missions against militias of the "Islamic State," which also has offshoots in the country. In July, jihadists launched an attack against Egyptian border patrols in Libyan territory; 22 soldiers were killed. Ebola, Ukraine and the advance of the "Islamic State" in Syria and Iraq have turned the world's attention to other regions. But the violence in Libya continues in the shadow of these other crises. An end to the fighting could be years away.


Morsi supporters protest in Cairo but avoid Tahrir Square About 2,000 Islamists have rallied in Cairo. In Egypt’s coastal city of Alexandria police fired tear gas to disperse Muslim Brotherhood supporters when they clashed with counterprotesters, a security official said. Some 2,000 supporters of deposed Egyptian President Mohammed Morsi rallied outside Cairo's presidential palace Friday, carrying posters of the former leader detained by the military since his July 3 removal. The Islamist Anti-Coup Alliance urged supporters to stay away from Tahrir Square, home of the 2011 revolution, during the protests to avoid more bloodshed after a week that saw nearly 80 Egyptians killed, many of them in the capital. The Interior Ministry had warned the Islamists that it would "confront any attempts to break the legitimacy" of the interim government, adding that it had deployed security reinforcements in Tahrir Square and streets around it and near the US embassy in central Cairo. However, after Friday's protests, which commemorated 100 days since Morsi's ouster, another Interior Ministry statement announced that most of the "limited" marches had passed without incident. On Sunday, fierce clashes had erupted when security forces prevented Islamists from trying to reach Tahrir Square, where supporters of the military celebrated the 40th anniversary of the Arab-Israeli war. Fighting there killed more than 50 people as nine more died in similar battles across Egypt. 'Places of bloodshed' Ahead of Friday, the Anti-Coup Alliance had repeatedly urged its supporters to march toward Tahrir Square, the main symbol of the uprising that toppled former strongman Hosni Mubarak in 2011. However, in a last-minute statement, the alliance, which rejects Egypt's military-installed government, called on protesters to avoid marching on Tahrir Square. The "coup regime is shedding blood without any respect to law or values adopted by our great people," read the statement from the coalition, spearheaded by Morsi's Muslim Brotherhood movement. "So the alliance is calling for marchers to avoid places of bloodshed, be it Tahrir or other squares," the statement added, noting that such locations would "lead to more bloodshed." At least 77 people have died in protests across Egypt since October 4. Nationwide, protests and crackdowns have led to the deaths of up to 1,000 people and the detention of 2,000, mostly Islamists, since August 14, when security forces killed hundreds of Morsi supporters in a brutal crackdown at Cairo's Rabaa al-Adawiya and Nahda squares. mkg/dr (Reuters, AFP, AP)


Religious tolerance far from guaranteed in Egypt Despite a long history of living side-by-side, tensions are rising between Egypt's Christian Coptic community and ultra-conservative Muslims. At the Coptic museum in Cairo, evidence of Egypt's storied diversity is on full display. Veiled female art students are hunched over sketchbooks, laboring at drawings of a limestone frieze from an ancient church. In the museum gift shop, icons of Christian saints share shelf space with miniature replicas of the pyramids and Pharaonic idols that predate Christianity by centuries.  Sarwat Malak, who runs the gift shop, says he's heard about growing tensions between ultraconservative Muslims and Egypt's Christian minority, but he's not worried.  "Christians touch Jesus, not fear any man," Malak says, his point clear, despite his spotty English.  In the months after the Egyptian revolution, Copts are concerned about a pattern of attacks on Christians and their property, which they call a grim reminder that despite the country's celebrated mix of religious and cultural customs, tolerance is never guaranteed.  Youssef Sidhom is the editor-in-chief of a weekly Christian newspaper called Watani. He is a trim, serious man, who took over the paper from his father and proudly notes that Watani has Arabic, English and French sections, and publishes a monthly edition in Braillefor blind readers.  Sidhom, like many Egyptians, is proud of the country's long history in which Muslims and Christians lived side-by-side, weathering periods of peace and turmoil. But he says that life is becoming more difficult for Christians following the revolution.  "Christians do really feel concerned about their security and safety," Sidhom says. "Every day you can expect something to happen and many things happen. Maybe not on a vast scale, but things having the nature of atrocities against Christians remain." Coptic Christians are proud of their heritage In October, Coptic Christians and their Muslim supporters staged a peaceful rally in front of Egypt's state television building in Cairo to protest the burning of a church in southern Egypt. Twenty-seven people were killed when the group was set upon by the Egyptian military. The incident, now widely known as the Maspero massacre, gave rise to fears that both the military and radical Muslims are targeting Egypt's Christians.  Radical roots Many Egyptians have been taken aback by the emergence of a deep vein of social and religious conservatism that appeared after the revolution, and which is embodied by Salafis, the adherents of a school of Islamic thought that urges a strict interpretation of the Koran. Before the revolution, Salafis comprised a tiny, silent minority. Many Egyptians had never heard of them. Hosni Mubarak kept a tight grip on Islamist groups, jailing their leaders and forcing their members underground.  Salafis won 24 percent of the seats in democratic elections for Egypt's powerful lower house of parliament, stunning even the savviest political observers. Their success, along with that of the less conservative, but more fearsomely organized Freedom and Justice Party of the Muslim Brotherhood has led some Christians to suggest that Egypt's revolution was a setback for minority populations. There are fears that radical Salafists could gain the upperhand Twenty-three-year-old John Hanna, a Copt who marched with the revolutionaries in Tahrir Square, exhales heavily and hedges a bit when asked if the revolution has failed.  "That's a hard question," he says. "We were trying to get rid of the dictatorship as a whole. I will never regret trying to do something right, because if it had actually worked, we would have been a much, much better place."  Constitutional crisis Hanna and Sidhom, like most Copts, are quick to note that they have a great respect for Islam and for moderate Muslims. Their moderate and liberal Muslim compatriots are similarly distressed by what they view as a craven power grab by Islamist political parties who now form a majority in parliament.  Those fears are perhaps best illustrated by the fierce debate that is now raging over the creation of Egypt's new constitution, which is to be written by a 100-member committee. Many Egyptians hoped the document would be the cornerstone of a new nation, guaranteeing rights and freedoms that would have been unthinkable under the strongmen who ruled Egypt for decades. But when the parliament chose the members of that committee, only a handful were Christians, women or liberals. The Coptic church pulled its members from the constitutional assembly, calling it "pointless."  "When these Copts and women and liberals are pulling out of the constitution that's being written, they are taking out the credibility of the process of writing it," says John Hanna, who is sensitive to concerns that leaving the constitutional assembly is seen by some as tantamount to giving up on the political process in Egypt altogether.  And the move seems to have worked. On April 10, a Cairo administrative court blocked the constitutional assembly from continuing its work. It is unclear on what legal grounds the court's decision rests, and there is certain to be an appeal. But the court's explanation for the suspension is notable. The members of the assembly, the court said, failed to reflect Egypt's political and social diversity.    Author: Noel King, Cairo Editor: Rob Mudge


Liberals protest against Egypt's 'pharaoh' Disappointed with the pace of post-revolutionary reforms, tens of thousands of people gathered in Tahrir Square to express their discontent with President Morsi. Many of the protesters once supported the president. Cairo's Tahrir Square was once again the center of protests by Egyptian demonstrators unhappy with their government's actions. The square in central Cairo was host to thousands of protesters upset with newly elected President Mohammed Morsi and a decree he made Thursday to give himself sweeping powers over all branches of government. Nearly all the demonstrators were liberals like 20-something Schahier, and they had a common view of Morsi's decree. "If we accept this, then this is going to be the end," Schahier said. "He has all the powers - he has the legislative powers, he has the judiciary powers and he has the executive powers. He has everything now. He is like an emperor." Politician Mohamed ElBaradei wrote on Twitter that Morsi "usurped all state powers and appointed himself Egypt's new pharaoh." Even those who believed in Morsi said they were disappointed by his actions Most of the people who took to Tahrir Square over the last two days agreed. The demonstration on Friday had been planned long ago, and the presidential decree earlier this week was simply another item on the protesters' already long list of complaints. Those include the fact that the committee tasked with writing a new constitution is made almost exclusively of Islamists. The decree, however, did convince more people to take to the street than the protest would have otherwise managed to gather. Tens of thousands of people assembled at Tahrir Square on Friday evening. Early Saturday morning, Egyptian police used tear gas to disperse the crowds.  Tarek Nassar said Morsi and other members of the Muslim Brotherhood were a group of liars and fascists.  "He promised many, many things," the man in his mid-60s said. "Tell me one single promise he kept! I have absolutely no trust in them." Chants of "Down, down with the Muslim Brotherhood" and posters with similarly critical messages could be heard and seen all over Tahrir Square. There was even suspicion over demands Morsi had actually met. For example, the Egyptian president previously agreed to demands to remove the Mubarak-era state prosecutor from office.  But Schahier said he still did not have any faith in Morsi or the Muslim Brotherhood. Protesters aren't sure what will become of their demonstrations "I do not believe his intention was to remove the prosecutor for the sake of the revolution," he said. "I think he wanted to remove him for the sake of the Muslim Brotherhood." Schahier said he is even concerned by the part of the decree that allows for the retrial of former regime member acquitted of murdering demonstrators. "Maybe the retrials are a good point, but I have my doubts because of all the other points in the decree," he said. Many of the demonstrators are part of the Egyptian middle class. They speak English, are well-dressed and attended university. Younger protesters include members of the many new liberal political parties and movements. The organizations are united in their opposition to Morsi's degree and their symbols are omnipresent at the demonstrations. Police broke up the demonstration in Tahrir Square "We are demanding that the assembly writing the constitution be dissolved because it does not represent all Egyptians," said Abdul Bar Zahran, a functionary of the Free Egyptians Party, holding a party flag during the protest. "It does not represent women, minorities, Christians, liberals or even the other revolutionaries." It remains unclear what effect, if any, the protests will have. Schahier said he was taking a realistic view of the situation.  "I just don't know, but we're hoping for the best," he said. "The problem is that the Muslim Brotherhood can get the same numbers or even bigger numbers any time they want." That's just what the Brotherhood did. Thousands of members of the Muslim Brotherhood and Salafists assembled in front of the Presidential Palace to show their support of Morsi. Late Friday the evening, it remained to be seen whether the sit-in started by liberal protesters in Tahrir Square would continue or be broken up by authorities.


Death, violence and displacement: The persecution of Christians Believers: attacked and killed; churches, schools and businesses: looted and torched - Christians are the most persecuted religious group in the world. Can Christians hope for the freedom to practice without fear? Dirty rubble and grey ash lie in piles strewn across the floor. Bare, smoke-stained arches frame the clear, blue sky. Once upon a time a roof would have shielded the interior of the Prince Tawadros Monastery in Fayoum, Egypt, from the hot sun, but now it is gone, destroyed by flames just like many other Christian buildings across the country that were set on fire.  “People now pray in the ashes of the churches,” says Mina Thabet, a researcher from the Egyptian Commission for Rights and Freedoms and himself a Christian living in the North African country, who provided the photo of the scene described above. “The churches have been destroyed and praying on the streets can cause problems.”  The church was one of more than 30 churches around Egypt that were #link:http://www.hrw.org/news/2013/08/21/egypt-mass-attacks-churches:looted and torched#, along with schools and businesses belonging to the minority Coptic Christian community in Egypt as part of attacks that followed the ousting of Islamist President Mohammed Morsi in July 2013.  “Coptic Christians had taken part in the revolution against Morsi because of a long history of violence by Morsi and his group,” says Thabet. He says that then Christians became targets of violence: “It didn’t stop in a particular area, it spread around Egypt. It reached it’s peak on August 14, 2013. We’ve witnessed a lot of violence against Christians.”  Largest religion - most persecuted  Egypt is just one of around 130 countries where Christians face persecution, according to a report released by the #link:http://www.ekd.de/english/4250-edi_2013_07_01_ecumenical_report_on_religious_freedom_of_christians.html:Evangelical Church in Germany (EKD)# in 2013. Despite being the largest religion worldwide, it’s #link:http://www.ekd.de/english/4250-edi_2013_07_01_ecumenical_report_on_religious_freedom_of_christians.html:2.2 billion believers# are believed to be the #link:http://www.dw.de/persecuted-christians-suffer-for-their-faith/a-17306297:most persecuted#.  Despite the Middle East being the birthplace of Christianity, it has long-been one of the epicenters of persecution for the religion, where the population is estimated to have fallen from around #link:http://www.csmonitor.com/World/Middle-East/2013/1222/What-the-Middle-East-would-be-like-without-Christians:20 percent a century ago to around four to five percent#.  Since the start of the Arab Spring in 2011, violence against Christians in the region has increased. In one incident in Egypt, dozens were killed as part of clashes between Coptic Christians, Islamists and security forces following protests against #link:http://www.bbc.com/news/world-middle-east-15235212:attacks on a church#. Christians have fled violence in parts of Iraq after being ordered to submit to Islamic rule or leave. In Syria, once considered a haven for believers, sectarian civil war has seen Christians #link:http://www.dw.de/syrian-christians-caught-between-two-sides/a-16148169:targeted and driven from their homes# by extremist groups including the Islamic State, which also has taken hold in some regions of Iraq.  “Before their were no problems,” says one Syrian Christian living in Berlin, who asked not to be name for fear of repercussion. “We all lived together, and nobody asked if you were Christian or Muslim. But people started to ask and now all the Christians are afraid because they know what’s happening in places such as in al-Raqqa.”  Christians in danger  Meanwhile, in Egypt, the violence of the past few years largely seems to have subsided. The election of President Abdel-Fattah el-Sissi into power in June, has brought stability back to the country - something for which many Christians in the country prayed.  But it is this support for the former general, a man many fear could take Egypt back to the dictatorship they left behind with the overthrow of former leader Hosni Mubarak, that also puts Christians in danger.  Georges Fahmi, a research fellow at the Lebanon-based Carnegie Middle East Center, says that while many Christians supported the uprisings against dictators such as Mubarak, and Bashar Assad in Syria, the consequent violence and conflict led some to ally with the leaders to return to stability. Churches were not the only buildings to be burned down in Egypt - a Coptic Christian orphanage also went up in flames. “Many turned back to the churches, which supported security over freedom,” says Fahmi, specializing in religious minorities in the region. “At the beginning they joined [the revolution] hoping for a new regime for citizenship and human rights, but they are more sensitive and went back quickly.”  However, Thabet says that despite el-Sisi bringing stability to the country and an ebb in violence, the situation for Christians remains difficult. The religious minority is discriminated against and does not have the same rights as the Muslim majority.  “They [the authorities] can close a church and say it’s a threat to national unity...we’ve never been allowed to rebuild the churches that were burned,” he says. “And people are not allowed to convert to Christianity.”  Death threats  It’s a situation that is mirrored in Turkey, where #forchristssake’s Petrus and others belonging to the Syriac Orthodox Church face discrimination because of their beliefs.  “When I’m at church, I’m okay. It’s life outside church that’s difficult,” he told Life Links reporter Anna during the episode. “I’m sad that I can’t study our theology outside the monastery.”  Still, it’s not only the Middle East where Christians face such problems. In Indonesia, the protestant Filadelfia Community’s pastor received death threats and blockades were erected to prevent them building a church. In Nigeria, Christians have faced increasing violence from the extremist Boko Haram militants, with dozens killed in #link:http://www.bbc.com/news/world-africa-27690687:attacks on churches#. And in North Korea almost all Christians have been driven out of the country. Muslim demonstrators in Malaysia campaigned for Christians not to be able to use the word “Allah” to refer to God. The country’s highest court decided in favor of the ban. Meanwhile, in Malaysia, a mainly Muslim nation, the country’s highest court ruled in favor of a ban on Christians using the word “Allah”, the #link:http://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-27970565:Arabic word for god to refer to their God#.  Despite the worldwide threat to Christians, Thabet says in Egypt the community will continue to fight for better conditions for both itself and other minority groups.  “There’s a lot to do, but we have to start,” he says. “We’re not talking just about problems for Christians, but also for other minorities. We want freedom of belief and religion for all Egyptians that face discrimination.”  And Fahmi remains optimistic for a better future for Christians - at least in the Middle East.  “It will take time and won’t happen in the short time, but the situation can’t last long,” he says. “The regime failed...at a certain point [people] will need to think about how they can live altogether in a regime based on human rights and freedom.”


Opinion: Tunisia as regional role model In Tunisia's parliamentary elections, secular forces won out against the Islamists - and progress toward democracy does not only manifests itself in the election outcome, says DW's Rainer Sollich. Nearly four years after the so-called Arab Spring began, the region is in a shocking state: Large swaths of Syria and Iraq are subject to the terror of the "Islamic State" (IS). The dictator of Damascus, Bashar al-Assad, continues to bomb parts of his citizenry. Libya and Yemen are sinking into chaos wrought by rival militias. In Egypt, the military has won back its power from the Muslim Brotherhood and is significantly curtailing Egyptians' freedom. Tensions between various ethnic and religious groups are consciously being exploited in many places in order to secure political power. In reality, everything has just gotten worse. One would almost be prepared to declare the entire Arab Spring a failure - were it not for the example of Tunisia. 'Ray of light' German Chancellor Angela Merkel is completely right in describing the small Maghreb state as a "ray of light" among the turmoil in the Arab World. Tunisia was the starting point of the wave of revolutions throughout the region. Today, it's the only country there that continues along the path toward democracy and the rule of law in a clearly visible way. It has thus far remained remarkably stable, showing progress with the peaceful unfolding and high voter turnout in the recent parliamentary elections in spite of the fear of terror strikes. Tunisians can only be congratulated on that front! DW's Rainer Sollich But Tunisia, too, is suffering from high unemployment and a lack of economic prospects. The country also has problems with the old regime's cadres and Islamists of varying shades right up to terrorists. Fortunately, the country's political class has thus far managed to address Tunisia's numerous problems in a largely peaceful way that has aimed at as much consensus as possible. In contrast to Egypt, where the Muslim Brotherhood wanted to rule on its own before being brutally pushed out of power, Islamists and secular powers in Tunisia have until now handled things in an exemplary way when it comes to preventing political power struggles from tearing the country apart or setting its development back by decades. Fair losers The initial reactions to the polls raise the hope that the country will continue down this promising path. The projected winner is the Nidaa Tounes block, in which representatives from the former regime are collaborating politically with secular forces. The Islamist Ennahda party - an ideological antipode to Nidaa Tounes - has become only the second strongest political force this time around. The Tunisian offshoot of the Muslim Brotherhood quickly admitted its defeat and congratulated the winners. Here, too, is a gesture of political culture and reasonability that one would seek in vain elsewhere in the region. Going forward, various scenarios are conceivable, and the presidential election next month could result in a further shift of power. Only this much is clear: winners Nidaa Tounes will have to form a coalition, either with the moderate Islamists in Ennahda or with another smaller secular party. The social and economic challenges ahead are enormous. For Tunisia's future, it will be of at least as much significance for the now disadvantaged Islamists to be responsibly included in the political process so that they don't radicalize from the inside out. That's at the core of the "Tunisian experiment." Europe should do all it can to support the country.


Opinion: Egypt has no choice It is a foregone conclusion that Egypt’s military ruler el-Sissi will win the first presidential elections since the July 2013 coup. But democracy on the Nile remains out of reach, says DW's Loay Mudhoon. Nearly one year after the military coup against Mohammed Morsi, the first democratically elected president in the most populous Arab country, Egyptians are voting for a new president on Monday (26.05.2014) and Tuesday. Anyone who thinks that the elections will be a fair political contest with democratic rules is likely to be disappointed on closer inspection. The vote is strongly reminiscent of the referendums held under long-time former President Hosni Mubarak. With Abdel-Fattah el-Sissi, former field marshal and de facto ruler since July 2013, the winner has already been chosen. This week, Egyptians living abroad already voted with 94 percent for el-Sissi - a surprising, record-breaking approval rate one would think. Bu,t considering the developments in Egypt over the past 10 months, it is no surprise. But first things first. Demonization and elimination of the opposition Not only Egypt's leadership was deposed with the violent overthrow of Morsi. The country's Muslim Brotherhood sponsored constitution was also suspended. After that, the military leadership around el-Sissi charged a select commission with drawing up a new constitution. A tailor-made basis for military guided “democracy” on the Nile was created in a hardly representative procedure and without the participation of the public. What followed next had nothing to do with the free and democratic hopes of the revolution of January 25, 2011. The Muslim Brotherhood had been systematically criminalized and demonized as the dark danger for the fatherland in a hysterical media campaign by the regime-loyal media. The liberal and secular opposition, mainly the democracy activists and revolutionaries of the first hour were also brutally supressed. Meanwhile, human rights organizations have registered a disturbing number of violations and a growing number of cases of systematic torture in the country's prisons; not to mention the ad hoc death penalties for alleged supporters of the Brotherhood by an arbitrary judiciary. El-Sissi is the military's candidate Egyptian voters have no real choice in the election because the real opposition has either been banned or intimidated. Hamdeen Sabahi, who is without a whiff of a chance, is running a hopeless street election campaign against the propaganda machinery of the state media. He unintentionally serves as a fig leaf to keep up the appearance of democratic elections. El-Sissi is certainly not the unselfish servant of the masses as he likes to present himself. He is and remains a man of the military. By now, nearly all state institutions are supporting him. First and foremos,t the politicized judiciary, the infamous interior ministry, the gigantic bureaucracy and the aggressively propagandistic mass media. Paradoxically, the puritanic, islamic, and politically incompetent Salafist Nur Party has even become a supporter of Egypt's new strongman, although it is unclear if they support him for purely opportunistic reasons, or because of pressure from Saudi Arabia. In addition to the complete restoration of the repressive state, which even outshines Mubarak's police apparatus, it is particularly important to note that el-Sissi has no political experience and no vision for Egypt's future. He also has not presented any program for solving Egypt's enormous economic problems. Comprehensive structural reforms cannot be expected from him. Don't legitimize the coup The political order in post-Morsi Egypt is financed and supported by anti-democratic forces in the Arab region. Mainly Saudi Arabia and the conservative Gulf monarchies support the new regime because they fear a revolutionary dynamic that could inspire their own increasingly dissatisfied youth to demand more freedoms. Furthermore, there is the fear of losing legitimacy due to the rise of the Muslim Brotherhood, which itself had been legitimized democratically. Egypt would have been bankrupt long ago without the financial support from the Arabian Peninsula. The EU should attach conditions to its cooperation with Egypt because the democratic transformation is a long way off and the prospects for improvement are bleak. The EU should under no circumstances legitimize the coup from July 2013. It is, for this reason, that the EU should not have sent election observers to Egypt in the first place because the international mission has only helped the country's new rulers.


Human rights still at risk in Egypt As the Muslim Brotherhood announces new rallies and General el-Sissi calls for a mandate to take stronger action against the opposition, human rights in Egypt are scarcely safe in the hands of either side. Abdel-Fattah el-Sissi is Egypt's new strong man: army chief, defense minister and deputy prime minister all in one. But el-Sissi is reaching for more. Clad in a grey uniform decorated with dozens of medals, and wearing dark sunglasses, the general addressed military graduates in Cairo on Wednesday (24.07.2013) in a speech broadcast live by state media. "I ask all honest and trustworthy Egyptians to come out on to the streets next Friday to give me a mandate to face potential violence and terrorism." Observers say el-Sissi is trying to get backing for a massive strike against the Muslim Brotherhoodand for an extension of military authority. When the elected president, Mohammed Morsi, was toppled in early July, the military also invoked the will of the people. Millions of Egyptians had protested against Morsi and Islamist rule. The anti-Islamist group Tamarod, which spearheaded the street protests then, backed el-Sissi's new call. Tamarod urged Egyptians to pack the nation's major squares on Friday to "support the armed forces' coming war on terrorism." Muslim Brotherhood plans rallies The Muslim Brotherhood have refused to be impressed by the latest statements and have said that will hold a rival rally on Friday. "Your threat will not prevent millions from continuing to gather," Essam el-Erian, a senior Brotherhood leader, wrote on Facebook. The Muslim Brotherhood said it would not participate in reconciliation talks urged by interim President Adli Mansur. "We refuse to recognize the current government," said a spokesman. Morsi's supporters have not relaxed their pressure on the government since his removal As a confrontation increasingly seems inevitable, talk of human rights has become mere lip service. "Everyone speaks about human rights, but everyone means something else," Hoda Salah, a German-Egyptian political scientist says. "When Morsi was president, he only ever meant his own peer group. Now, it is the opposite, and no one mentions the violation of rights of the Muslim Brotherhood." The Muslim Brotherhood has protested almost daily since Morsi's fall, with often hundreds of thousands taking to the streets. There are frequent clashes, and Brotherhood supporters are often attacked, initially by security forces and more recently by armed gangs. During the regime of toppled Egyptian dictator Hosni Mubarak, security forces paid criminal gangs to terrorize political opponents. About 200 people have been killed since Morsi was removed just three weeks ago. Allegations of ill-treatment Security forces resort to "excessive violence," according to Diana Eltahawy, an expert on Egypt at Amnesty International. Often police and the military shoot at demonstrators without reason, she says. Most of the 51 people who were killed during rallies outside the headquarters of the Republican Guard in early July were Morsi supporters. There have been injuries and deaths since the military took over - but there were before too Amnesty International says that hundreds of Morsi supporters arrested by the Egyptian authorities have been denied their legal rights. Detainees have said that they have been beaten on arrest, subjected to electric shocks or hit with rifle butts. Several leading members of the Muslim Brotherhood and its political wing, the Freedom and Justice Party, have also been detained. Often, the allegations against them are unclear. Morsi and some of his closest advisors have been held in a secret location for weeks - without an arrest warrant, without charges and without access to lawyers. "The legal basis of the arrests is unclear," says Eltahawy. Morsi's family has accused the military of kidnapping him, and the European Union has demanded his release. Repressive policies in the past Problems with the human rights situation in Egypt did not only start with the revolution. "Under Mubarak, the security apparatus was infamous for torturing and killing opponents of the regime," Eltahawy says. "That has not changed." The same people still work in police, military and secret service jobs. Human rights violations were numerous during Morsi's presidency too. Critical reporters, bloggers and other opponents of the Muslim Brotherhood were arrested and charged, demonstrators were killed. It is important that the new government change direction, Eltahawy says: "The authorities must show that they are not settling old scores or carrying out a repressive policy towards the Muslim Brotherhood." Investigations must be impartial and those responsible "must be brought to justice regardless of their political orientation or rank." Hoda Salah hopes for policies that will calm the situation and which are also committed to defending the human rights of the Muslim Brothers: "The Muslim Brotherhood must be included in the political process," she says. "Otherwise, Egypt faces years of civil war."


The dangerous job of selling books in Cairo Edouard Lambelet's well-known German bookshop is located close to Tahrir Square in Cairo. The bookseller has lived through many conflicts in Egypt, but for the first time, he's now considering throwing in the towel. Edouard Lambelet, who owns the famous German bookshop Lehnert & Landrock in downtown Cairo, has witnessed the turmoil in his city first-hand. In Cairo, violence and uncertainty are ubiquitous. The number of casualties rises every day. Fortunately, Lambelet has been able to avoid the most brutal street battles in his city. He managed to travel to Switzerland, his second home, before the conflicts between the army and the followers of the Muslim Brotherhood broke out. From there, he continued on to the United States, where his daughter lives. It wasn't exactly an escape, since his trip had been planned for some time. But the 76-year-old hadn't foreseen the escalation of the conflict. When the military claimed power, things in Cairo seemed to improve and the standstill in the country had finally come to an end. But then, everything changed: Cairo suffered the worst conflict since the Egyptian Revolution in 2011. Lehnert & Landrock has been in business for over 90 years From images to words The bookshop with the distinctive script above the entrance has been in existence for nearly a century. It is the go-to place in the city for international literature and is often referred to as simply "The German bookshop" - "even though it's run by a Swiss guy," Lambelet said with a laugh. Lambelet, who also has a doctorate in geology, was born in Cairo but spent his childhood and youth in Switzerland. In 1979, he got involved with his father's bookshop back in Cairo. The origins of the shop date back to 1924, when it was founded by two Germans: photographer Rudolf Franz Lehnert and bookkeeper Ernst Heinrich Landrock, Lambelet's step-grandfather. Co-founder Ernst Landrock was Lambelet's step-grandfather The two men launched their business with the aim of selling Lehnert's photographs from North Africa. Shortly after the outbreak of World War II, Kurt Lambelet - Landrock's stepson and Edouard Lambelet's father - took over the business, turning it in to a large bookshop after 1950. The end of a golden era Lehnert & Landrock, which is located close to Tahrir Square, managed to employ 35 people in its best years. Lambelet's wife, Roswitha, originally from Heidelberg, runs a branch of the Egyptian Museum just next door to the shop. Currently, the book store has 15 employees. Downstairs there is a gallery of Lehnert's well-known photos of the Arabic world; upstairs, books on everything from travel and cooking to fiction and textbooks are on display. In addition to works in German, there are a number of books in English and French. Rudolf Lehnert was a well-known photographer in his day Since the Muslim Brotherhood came to power in Egypt, the traditional bookshop has rapidly gone downhill. "The Muslim Brotherhood ruled for one year. During this time, unemployment increased rapidly and the country forfeited its currency reserves. We had no electricity up to four times a day for an hour each time," Lambelet said. Skills were secondary. The only thing that counted was loyalty to the Muslim Brotherhood. "In politics, you won't find anyone with integrity - nowhere in the world, not even in Switzerland," Lambelet said. An alarming silence Very few customers meander between the shelves. For business owners like Lambelet, the past few months have been a catastrophe. Tourism has dropped drastically, due to the tense situation in the city. The German government recently advised its citizens not to travel to Egypt. Cairo residents avoid the bookshop. It seems the people have things other than books on their minds. Deutscher Buchladen in Kairo Lehnert & Landrock "There are days when not a single customer comes into the shop," Lambelet said. "The people are afraid to come to the city center. And we're located in the city center. Egypt used to be one of the safest countries. You felt safer than in Europe or America. But that's over now." During the revolution two years ago, the Mubarak regime released over 20,000 criminals from prison, according to Lambelet, who says that has made residents uneasy. His wife has been mugged twice already. Dark times have passed Edouard Lambelet started selling books in the early 1950s Lambalet observes the events in his country with great sadness. "Egypt has experienced wars and conflicts again and again. Since the revolution in 1952 we've been talking about leaving the country. But every dark period has passed. The dark times were short and the good times were much longer," remembered the bookseller. Now for the first time, that's not the case. The man who has spent three-quarters of his life in Egypt and praises the warmth of its people, is now considering giving up his shop completely or handing it over to his employees. "If the situation doesn't improve or becomes like in Syria, then it makes no sense for us to stay in Cairo," he said. Still, the country has not yet fallen into civil war. The mood among the bookshop employees is grim, though, as it is among most Egyptians. The shop has traditionally given its employees a base salary plus commission. But with sales now lower than ever, commissions can no longer be paid out. "My employees have made a great effort to simply stay alive," said Lambelet, who is still in the US at the moment and is running his shop long-distance. "But I cannot pay them more when there is nothing in the cash register."


Political uncertainty rising in Egypt Egypt faces more uncertainty following the weekend poll, even as the cadre of generals that has ruled the country since the ouster of former President Hosni Mubarak, moved to consolidate legislative and executive power. Hundreds of supporters of the Muslim Brotherhood's candidate, Mohammed Morsi, took to Tahrir Square early Monday, after the brotherhood claimed a win in the divisive election. But Morsi's rival, Ahmed Shafiq, denied that he'd lost the election and the commission that is overseeing the vote warned that the race was tight and said a winner would not be declared until Thursday. Meanwhile, Egypt's ruling military generals issued a surprise constitutional declaration which awarded them sweeping powers over nearly every aspect of Egyptian governance, from the legislature, to the national budget. If permitted to stand, the declaration would further enshrine the military's position at the top of Egypt's chaotic political heap and might reduce the president to little more than a figurehead. Choice between bad and worse As they stood in lines outside of polling stations beneath a withering summer sun, many Egyptians admitted that they were voting out of a sense of duty, rather than any affinity for either of the candidates. "This is not what I'd hoped for," said a physician who cast her vote in Cairo's wealthy Zamalek neighborhood. The woman kept her voice low and refused to give her name because, she said, she intended to cast her vote for Mohammad Morsi of the Muslim Brotherhood and feared retaliation in the event of a win by Ahmed Shafiq. "You know how [Shafiq] will bring security?" she asked. "By closing our mouths. Putting us in prison.This is the security. No democracy. No freedom." Morsi and Shafiq emerged as the finalists after a first round of voting that included 13 candidates. Their ascendance surprised many Egyptians who expected that less divisive candidates would fare better in the polls. "For me, Shafiq's history, you just don't trust the guy and with Morsi, I don't believe in the Muslim Brotherhood," said Farida Omar, a Cairo voter who said she considered voting a responsibility but was not pleased with either candidate. Omar said she intended to spoil her ballot. Early exit polling suggested a tight race in which Shafiq dominated Cairo, while Morsi fared better in rural areas. Choice between bad and worse? Shafiq, the last Prime Minister to serve under Hosni Mubarak, positioned himself as a hardline law and order candidate and repeatedly spoke of his intention to crack down on protesters. Many Egyptians are exhausted by months of pitched street battles that have frightened away foreign tourists and plunged Egypt's economy into a downward spiral. "I can walk in the streets without being kidnapped or something else happening," said 23-year-old Amira Hussein, when asked what she hoped a new president might offer her. The young woman called the Egyptian revolution "wrong," and said she was voting for Ahmed Shafiq because he was the closest candidate to Hosni Mubarak. Under Mubarak's iron-fisted 30-year reign, incidents of violent crime were low and even with a population approaching 20 million, Cairo was known as a safe city. Now, violent crime is on the rise. But Shafiq's hardline stance failed to appeal to voters who viewed him as an extent of Mubarak's corrupt reign. "I want changes in Egypt, not the Mubarak regime," said 55-year-old engineer Adel Abdel Ati. "I'd like to try something new - maybe it will be better." Military consolidates power The announcement that the Supreme Council of the Armed Forces (SCAF) would consolidate its influence with a constitutional declaration that awards it broad powers of governance, came as a disappointing surprise to observers and progressive Egyptians who say the SCAF's recent political maneuvering amounts to little more than a soft coup. The military has consolidated its power Last week, Egypt's Supreme Court dissolved the country's democratically elected parliament on technical grounds, four months after the Islamist-dominated body was seated. But even as analysts balked, only a small percentage of Egyptians expressed any outrage over the dissolution of parliament and on voting day many said they'd seen little evidence that the parliament had accomplished anything during its time in office. "Egypt has very respectable courts and judges and people must respect law," said Rami Greiss, a Cairo ophthalmologist who would only say that he was "voting for Egypt." Others expressed hope that new parliamentary elections might allow Egypt's activist movement, which formed the backbone of the initial uprising, but has so far failed to form a coherent political opposition, the time it needs to organize politically. On the whole, the elections seemed to illustrate that many Egyptians have lost the optimism and even reverence with which they once greeted the revolution. "The revolution is not over," said 19-year-old university student Mohammed Abdel Rafat, as he surveyed an empty Tahrir Square on Saturday afternoon. A march aimed at protesting the dissolution of parliament had drawn only a few dozen activists the night before and in the afternoon heat, most had abandoned the square. Asked who he was voting for, Abdel Rafat said he didn't like either of the candidates and he wasn't going to bother. Author: Noel King, Cairo Editor: Rob Mudge


Opening Pandora's Box in Yemen As the situation deteriorates almost by the hour in Yemen, the sheer uncertainty of what happens next could trigger a regional conflict, writes Adam Baron of the European Council on Foreign Relations. For roughly three years, Yemen's post-Arab Spring transition has been held up as a model for the region. After the 2011 uprising against Ali Abdullah Saleh, the narrative went, the UN and western-backed Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC)-mediated power transfer agreement - which offered Yemen's longtime leader immunity from prosecution in exchange for leaving power - set the country on what was to be a groundbreaking path to a more peaceful, prosperous and democratic country - under the leadership of the former president's longtime deputy and consensus candidate, Abdo Rabbu Mansour Hadi. The slow motion collapse of this so-called model has accelerated over the past few days to unimaginable heights. On Wednesday, Zaidi Shi'a Houthi rebels - who had effectively besieged the capital since last September - made a move toward Aden, where Hadi had been since leaving Sanaa in February, forcing Yemen's embattled president to flee. Hours later a Saudi-lead coalition launched airstrikes at Houthi and military targets across the country - something that had been nearly unfathomable just days ago. Going nowhere fast? It's difficult to tell where Yemen is heading; one would have to look back to the aftermath of the 1962 revolution against the Yemeni monarchy to find a comparable point in the country's history in terms of sheer uncertainty. Notably, the civil war that followed drew in many of the same players involved in the current conflict. Saudi Arabia and Egypt, many Yemenis have quipped, fought on differing sides but both lost, the Saudis backing the losing monarchists and the Egyptians supporting the victorious republicans but bogged down in a conflict that weakened the country's military so significantly that its been compared to Egypt's rout at the hands of Israeli army in the 1967 Six Day war. Contemporary Yemen is no kinder to invaders. The terrain is deeply rugged - and the Houthis, veterans of six wars waged against them - know the mountains of northwest Yemen by heart. Adam Baron of the ECFR The question now remains how things will go moving forward. Reactions to the start of the bombing campaign have only underlined Yemen's deep internal divides. Deep opposition is widespread - even many who deeply dislike the Houthis have declared that they will back them against the coalition, highlighting the unifying effect of blowback from foreign intervention. But many Yemenis - particularly in the South and center of the country - have expressed support for the strikes, hoping that the coalition will end the Houthis' hegemony. What next? It's far from certain that will be the case. The Houthis remain the dominant power in much of Yemen's north, benefitting from an alliance with key branches of the Yemeni Armed Forces, many of which remain loyal to former President Saleh. But the Saudi-lead coalition strikes have already gone a long way in degrading those forces' capabilities, striking a key air force base in Sanaa that is under Houthi control. But the Houthis will be difficult - if not impossible - to defeat through airstrikes alone, and the repercussions from the ensuing civilian casualties risks inflaming Yemenis further against what is already a controversial intervention. Beyond all of this lies the question of what comes next. The Saudi-lead coalition has stated that its goal is to restore Hadi, who they say remains Yemen's legitimate president. But bringing Hadi back into the seat of the presidency is undeniably easier said than done. Hadi's weakness as president ultimately paved the way for the current crisis; the fact that his current location is unknown only heightens the questions regarding his ability to restore the central government's hegemony over the whole of Yemen. Indeed, there's a tremendous risk of a power vacuum if the Houthis were removed - one that extremist groups like Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula would be more than happy to capitalize on. At this point, it remains clear that the only solution is a form of peaceful dialogue. Neither Saudi Arabia, nor Iran, nor the United States nor, to state the obvious, Yemenis stand to gain from an extended armed conflict. But worries are rife that the time for talks may have passed. Indeed, by striking Yemen, the anti-Houthi coalition may very well have opened a pandora's box that could shake the Arabian Peninsula and the rest of the region in uncertain ways in the days, weeks and months to come. Adam Baron is visiting fellow at ECFR, his areas of expertise are Yemen and the Arab Peninsula. Between 2011 and 2014 he worked as a journalist in Yemen for various publications including The Economist and the Christian Science Monitor.


Opinion: West should celebrate with Egypt, but follow up with deeds The resignation of Hosni Mubarak was overdue and is a moment of joy for Europeans and Americans, says Bernd Riegert. Now it’s time that we follow our words up with deeds. Egypt is finally free! That's what demonstrators are shouting in Cairo and across Egypt. The revolution succeeded. The autocratic ruler has been washed away by a tidal wave called democracy. We are witnessing history in the making. This is a moving moment that evokes the cataclysms in Europe back in 1989. Hosni Mubarak recognized that he didn't have any chance anymore to moderate the necessary transition to real democracy in Egypt. He should have stepped down already on Thursday, now he has done so after a 24 hour delay. The joy of the Egyptian people is stunning and contagious. But the interesting questions now are: What will happen in Egypt? Will the military that Mubarak charged with leading the country create a credible path for the transition to real democracy? We all hope and wish that this great experiment will succeed. Europe and the United States now must make good on their word and offer every possible assistance, political or financial, to build democracy in Egypt. The EU's foreign policy chief Catherine Ashton already declared last weekend that the European Union was ready to support democratic processes. Now she needs to hop into the next available plane and follow up her words with deeds if the new Egyptian leadership calls for it. But it will be important not to create the impression that Europe or the US hope to profit from this transition time in Egypt. This is a victory for the Egyptians and it should stay that way. However, behind the scenes Europe and the US should use their influence - if they have any - so that the situation in the region remains relatively stable and the revolution doesn't negatively affect the Egyptian peace deal with Israel that was signed by former President Mubarak. It would be appropriate for Europe's foreign ministers to convene a special meeting on Monday in Brussels to discuss the events in Egypt. Whether the spark of democracy spreads to other states will be crucial for the stability in North Africa and the Middle East. At the moment we can only watch in amazement and with sympathy and hope that this historic revolution remains a peaceful one. Author: Bernd Riegert (mik) Editor: Susan Houlton


Winners of #TheBobs14 The winners of The Bobs awards for the best in online activism use online media to inform people around the world on events from Egypt to Bangladesh and Ukraine to the Middle East. DW presents a summary of the winners. When 15 online media experts and activists came together for a two-day conference in Berlin to name the winners of Deutsche Welle's award, The Bobs - Best of Online Activism, the debate in the room was as active as the discussion online under #thebobs14, where links and impressions of nominees were exchanged. A series of close votes demonstrated how the jury members, representing the contest's 14 languages, wrestled with the difficult decision of choosing just one of winner in each of the contest's six multilingual categories. In addition to the six awards handed out by jury members, the public also voted online for the winners of the People's Choice Awards, which can all be seen on The Bobs website. Below are the people and projects that won The Bobs 2014 Jury Awards. Best Blog The photo blog by Egyptian Mosa'ab Elshamy (above) won the top prize at The Bobs. His impressive photos and photo essays on current events in Cairo won over jurors, as did his work to present a view of modern cultural life in Egypt. He recently accompanied young Mahraganat musicians through the underground clubs of the Egyptian capital. During the Egyptian revolution, his work also appeared on the cover of "Time" and among the magazine's list of top 10 pictures of the year. "Mosa'ab Elshamy illustrates in a very impressive way the rifts that exist in Egyptian society," the jury said of his work. "Although we do not all speak Arabic, we can all understand the power of his images," added jury member Tarek Amr. Best Social Activism The website Visualizing Palestine won The Bobs award for Best Social Activism. The team behind the site creates and presents fact-based infographics illustrating the circumstances Palestinians and Palestinian refugees face on a daily basis. While many of the graphics address issues dealing with relations to Israel, Visualizing Palestine also confronts environmental issues, social topics and education. "The issue of the Palestinians is an extremely emotional and polarizing one," said jury member Georgia Popplewell, the managing director of Global Voices Online. "Visualizing Palestine brings facts to that discussion without sacrificing emotion." Most Creative & Original The winner of The Bobs award in the Most Creative and Original category takes micro-blogging to the extreme. As millions of ultra-short, 140-character or less messages careen around the internet, the artist behind weicombo gets his point across using just one Chinese character. While he does not provide his name for safety reasons, weicombo's creator comments on current events by slightly altering the character to lend his posts a touch of irony and satire. His posts present readers with a daily guessing game of inferring the point he is looking to get across. Word games and puzzles have a long tradition in China, according to The Bobs jury member Tienchi Martin-Liao. "Weicombo has found a very creative and clever way to get around censorship in China," she said. "His posts are not only political but also entertaining and his readers love him for that." Global Media Forum Award "From Information to Participation" is the theme of the 2014 Deutsche Welle Global Media Forum as well as for The Bobs special Global Media Forum award, which was won by "Khabar Lahariya." The weekly local language newspaper has been written, published and delivered by a community of women across rural parts of India for the past 12 years. It connects with thousands of people in parts of the country's north and northeast that seldom get the attention of national media. "The newspaper is a shining example that a functioning democracy is dependent on access to information for all people," said jury member and blogger Rohini Lakshane. Best Innovation The BanglaBraille project enables the production of school textbooks to be printed in braille for visually impaired students in Bangladesh. The project's organizers also create audio versions of the textbooks that students download and listen to. There are currently more than 50,000 visually impaired students in Bangladesh without access to educational materials. The BanglaBraille team assembled a network of volunteers who digitize the books and conduct fundraising for the project. "BanglaBraille has fundamentally improved the lives of many students in Bangladesh and is fighting against a problem that authorities in our country have criminally neglected," said jury member Shahidul Alam of Bangladesh. Reporters Without Borders Award The Bobs special award, presented in conjunction with the press freedom group Reporters Without Borders, went to the Ukrainian project YanukovychLeaks. The site presents the work of a group of Ukrainian and other journalists who worked to salvage and report on records which former Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych and his supporters threw into a pool at a huge presidential estate while fleeing the country after the Maidan revolution. YanukovychLeaks aims to digitize and catalogue the records and make them available to the public. "It is especially important during times of crisis to support independent journalists," said Christian Mihr, head of Reporters Without Borders' German branch and a member of The Bobs jury. The project was also praised by jury member Renata Avila of Guatemala for providing access to the complete documents. "You can use the files to support different opinions," she said. "But citizens can see all the information for themselves and decide for themselves how important it is, and what it means." Celebrating it's10th anniversary, The Bobs - Best of Online Activism was started by Deutsche Welle in 2004 to promote freedom of expression online and to contribute to a public discussion of censorship. "I think The Bobs have shown over the last 10 years that these kinds of awards can have a real impact," Mihr told DW. "The award has helped many of the past winners continue their work under repressive regimes, get around censorship, and even protected them from attacks for daring to tell the truth in an open and independent way."


Anti-military protests in Egypt draw low turnout Islamists in Egypt have held anti-military protests in the wake of a harsh police crackdown. The Muslim Brotherhood had called for mass rallies, but could only manage low turnout on the streets. The protests in Cairo were dubbed the "Friday of Martyrs" by Islamists who had asked people to take the streets after weekly Muslim prayers. Several thousand supporters of the Brotherhood, the movement that backs ousted President Mohammed Morsi, demonstrated in the Cairo neighborhood of Muhandesseen, the Maadi suburb and in Giza. The turnout paled in comparison to the hundreds of thousands who protested earlier this month before security forces violently cleared two protest camps in the capital city. There were no reports of violence in Cairo on Friday, although security officials said one person was killed and 15 Islamists were arrested in clashes in the Nile Delta city of Tanta. The official MENA news agency also reported protests attended by several hundred in the Mediterranean city Alexandria, Suez to the north, and Qena and Aswan in the south. Days of bloodshed About 1,000 people have been killed since police and the military cleared the Cairo protest camps on August 14. The bloodshed drew international condemnation, with the rights group Amnesty International among the latest to weigh in on Friday. "Security forces failed to take control of the situation or respond to violence used against them in a measured and responsible way to minimize loss of life," said Hassiba Hadj Sahraoui, the organization's Deputy Director of the Middle East and North Africa. "Many bystanders also lost their lives.” In the ensuing the days, Egyptian authorities expanded their crackdown on Brotherhood officials. Supreme guide Mohammed Badie was taken into custody on Tuesday, the first time the head of the movement was arrested in over 30 years. Morsi himself is being held at an undisclosed location on charges relating to a 2011 prison break and the incitement of death and torture of protesters. The former President Hosni Mubarak, meanwhile, was let go from prison on Thursday and taken to a military hospital in Cairo. Now 85 years old, Mubarak was toppled during Egypt's 2011 revolution, but his release has sparked concern that the country's military authorities are reinstating the old regime. US weighs aid In an interview with the broadcaster CNN that aired Friday, US President Barack Obama said he was weighing whether to continue the over $1 billion (1.3 billion euros) in military aid delivered to Egypt annually. "You know, my sense is with Egypt is that the aid itself may not reverse what the interim government does," Obama said. "But I think what most Americans would say is that we have to be very careful about being seen as aiding and abetting actions that we think run contrary to our values and our ideals." "What we're doing right now is doing a full evaluation of the US-Egyptian relationship," he added. dr/mkg (AFP, Reuters, dpa)


Fatwa death edicts prompt Egypt to boost security for opposition Security has been stepped up around leading opposition figures in Egypt after hardline Muslim clerics called for them to be killed. The Islamist government has condemned the so-called "fatwas." Egyptian Interior Minister Mohammed Ibrahim on Thursday issued the order for police to deploy extra security at the homes of prominent opposition members. Prime Minister Hesham Kandil warned that the religious edicts -also known as fatwas - could result in "sedition and disturbance." "These extremist edicts are not related to Islam," the state news agency reported Kandil as saying. "The Egyptian people had a glorious January Revolution for the sake of establishing a democratic society where dialogue prevails, not killing." The fatwas came in response to recent violence that followed National Salvation Front (NSF) calls for protest against President Mohammed Morsi and his Islamist Muslim Brotherhood. The opposition accuses Morsi of trying to monopolize power. Speaking on the religious television channel Al-Hafez, prominent radical cleric, Mahud Shabaan, accused NSF leaders of "setting Egypt on fire to gain power. The verdict against them under God's law is death,” he said. The cleric mentioned by name two well-known Front leaders: leading dissident and the former head of the United Nations' nuclear watchdog agency, Mohamed ElBaradei (pictured second from left), and former presidential candidate Hamdeen Sabahi (pictured third from left). Another hardline religious leader, Wagdi Ghoneim, issued a video declaring that, if the government didn't act against the opposition, private citizens would. "We will kill the criminals, the thugs, the thieves and those who give them money and those who help them with words. No mercy with them," Ghoneim loudly declared. The security order came a day after the assassination of Tunisian opposition leader Chokri Belaid, who was gunned down outside his home in the capital, Tunis. Belaid's family claim the killing was carried out by Islamists. rc/pfd (AFP, AP, dpa, Reuters)


'A sincere believer who is in love with Egypt' A new song posted online this week entitled "We want you," sings the praises of Egypt’s military commander Abdel-Fattah el-Sissi, while a lawsuit filed by a former politician demands that he run for the presidency. In a Cairo stadium earlier this week, thousands of his supporters thronged the stands calling out their support for the military strongman. "El-Sissi is my president!" they chanted, rallying under the slogan "Complete your good deed." With the constitution he championed swiftly approved last week, speculation has been rife that el-Sissi, Egypt's military leader who ousted former President Mohamed Morsi from office last July, will announce his candidacy for president. But while nearly everyone believes he will run and that a win is all but guaranteed, his decision to take on the role could pose huge political risks amid an array of severe political and economic woes. "Egypt needs a man of God and a sincere believer who is in love with Egypt," Wael Abou Sheashaa, one of the founders of a petition campaign that is urging el-Sissi to run for president, told DW. "He is the man who rose up to the will of the people…He is the man on the side of the revolution who decided to unite the people under the banner of democracy." Abou Sheashaa's campaign is not the only one. Multiple petitions have started over the past months claiming to have garnered millions of signatures in support of el-Sissi, though there is no way to confirm their numbers. El-Sissi is ubiquitous "The chances for him to run for office are most likely, and I think he will win in the first round, because of his popularity," General Sameh Seif Elyazal, director of the al-Gomhoria Center for political and security studies and a retired military general, told DW. "What we see now in the streets and what we see now with Egyptians is that they really want him to run. I would be very surprised if he didn't." Hero-in-waiting El-Sissi has become a hero to many after he stepped in to depose of Egypt's first democratically elected president, with photos of the general adorning shop windows across Cairo and his face appearing on chocolates and cupcakes. Following the constitutional referendum last week, videos went viral online where women were seen kissing his picture and dancing out of polling stations. "All of Egypt's women listened to el-Sissi when he asked us to come out and vote," said one woman in one popular video clip. "If he needs anything else, he only has to tell us and, God willing, we will not disappoint him." With the first phase of the road map that was introduced by the military in July now complete, after 98.1 percent of the 38.6 percent of registered voters who cast their ballots in the constitutional referendum voted yes, interim President Adly Mansour is set to announce when presidential and parliamentary elections will take place. Riding on the momentum of the new constitutional, el-Sissi's supporters now say they will take to the streets on January 25, the third anniversary of the Egyptian revolution, to call on the military leader to run for president. Many Egyptians who had grown tired of nearly three years of political unrest, see el-Sissi as the man capable of bringing stability and security. To his fans, he is a savior for leading the overthrow of Morsi - the very man who promoted el-Sissi to the position of minister of defense, a move that proved a massive political mistake. "If you remember the scenes of the coup, in Morsi's last speech, where Sissi is sitting there in the front row with a poker face, the only person in the world that knew what is going to happen is el-Sissi," Tarek Masoud, associate professor at Harvard University's John F. Kennedy School of Government and a Middle East expert, told DW. "I think people viewed it as an act of bravado, to actually get rid of the president who appointed you. They admired that in a way, they found it to be daring, and they sort of like that." Ready to run? Will he or won't he? El-Sissi, however, has neither confirmed nor denied that he intends to run for president, but his apparent reticence has allowed rumors to flourish. Just three days prior to the constitutional referendum, Egyptian state media reported that the military leader said at an army lecture that if he were to run for presidency, it "must be by the request of the people and with a mandate from my army." "When Egyptians say something, we obey and I will never turn my back on Egypt," he was quoted as saying. Many believed his comments to be a clear signal of his intentions to run. "This is a guy who looks at himself in the mirror every day and he's being told that he should run for president by everyone in a country he obviously reveres," said Masoud. "So why wouldn't he want to be the president?" Earlier this week, London-based Al-Hayat newspaper quoted an unnamed source saying el-Sissi planned to resign from his post as minister of defense within days in order to run for president with the army's backing. Other media has reported the general readying an electoral agenda for a presidential campaign. But despite the adoration cult, if el-Sissi is elected, he would face a daunting list of problems. Given the experience of Morsi, Masoud said the risks of being president of Egypt should be apparent to everyone. "You can ride into power on a wave of popular adoration and a few months later be found unwanted when the economy doesn't pick up, when tourism doesn't pick up," said Masoud. "Egypt has these big structural problems that I'm not sure el-Sissi can solve and I don't think there is any reason to believe that he would be immune from the same sources that eventually spelled public discontent with Mohamed Morsi." And in order to address the country's economic problems, analysts say el-Sissi must quell its political problems, a task that will not be easy. "Without resolving the political problems, it's unclear whether the el-Sissi administration, or any administration, can really produce the kind of economic growth and development that would be satisfactory, let alone good, for Egypt," Samer Shehata, a Middle East expert at the University of Oklahoma, told DW. "Ultimately, the president will be held accountable, not just for the political situation, because they're 'managing' that through force and intimidation, but really for the economy." The only way is down "If el-Sissi now were to run, he would be at the height of his popularity, and it would be downhill after that," Shehata added. Can el-Sissi achieve more stability for Egypt? With el-Sissi drawing support from those desiring security and stability, whether or not he can address the unrest could determine if his popularity will continue. Protests by the former president's Muslim Brotherhood, who won major victories in past elections, have continued almost on a daily basis. And although the so-called el-Sissi-mania has swept the nation and no other candidate seems to be able to rival the general, the perceived lack of competition stems partly from the fact that most of his opponents have been killed, arrested, and forcibly repressed. "El-Sissi is the only one that this 15-20 percent population of the Muslim Brotherhood view as the devil reincarnated, and it may be that him being president would be a lot more disruptive than if the presidency went to some other person who is seen as slightly more neutral," said Masoud. "I think if el-Sissi proves to be deeply polarizing and proves to not be able to fix the economy, people will withdraw from him, and if he proves to be unable to calm the political situation, then the army would probably not support him either." "El-Sissi may get elected president, but whether he stays there is an open question," he added. Adding to the polarization, is the growing discontent among secular activists who opposed Morsi but are now the target of the expanding crackdown on dissent. "He's giving people what they want, stability, and most importantly he's stressing nationalism," said one secular activist who asked to remain anonymous for security reasons. "But security and stability are pain killers for the problems that exist and I don't think he can save or develop Egypt on so many levels." "[El-Sissi] represents military fascism which is just replacing a religious one," he added. "When people turn against him they will be framed as terrorists and Muslim Brotherhood, but they will turn against him."


Egypt mourns eco-activist Mindy Baha El Din Egypt's environmental community is in mourning following the sudden death of activist Mindy Baha El Din. Local journalist Arwa Aburawa knew Baha El Din personally and gives her thoughts on the passing of a hero. I first met Mindy Baha El Din during an interview back in 2011. The first thing that struck me about her was her positive outlook on things. It seemed like, on environmental issues, she was immune to becoming cynical about anything. Born Mindy Rosenzweig, the Chicago-born American initially came to Egypt in 1988 with a mission to highlight the importance of conservation. In the end, it turned out that it was such a big task that she never left. Instead, she fell in love with Egypt's nature, met and married bird expert Sherif Baha El Din and became one of the country's leading green campaigners. She was also the Secretary of the 'Nature Conservation Egypt' organization, which is dedicated to conserving Egypt's environment. "Over the years, we have witnessed massive changes and degradation to Egypt's natural heritage," she told me back in 2011. "It is shocking how one generation made decisions about natural resource use, affecting present and all future generations of Egyptians." New environmental projects are sprouting up across Egypt, thanks to Baha El Din's groundwork "The nation is blessed with amazing nature, cultural heritage and traditional communities which need to be protected." Campaigning on different fronts During my environmental reporting on the Middle East, I would regularly receive tweets from Mindy about everything from campaigns to stop development projects near Lake Qarun, to efforts to end fishing in Ras Mohammed National Park. Mindy Baha El Din wasn't shy about making the most of social media and was proud of all the international support she managed to garner for her campaigns. "We are new to environmental activism," she confessed to me following the revolution in Egypt which saw the overthrow of the dictator Mubarak in early 2011. "It was not tolerated in the past but seems to suit the current atmosphere in the country." Indeed, following the Arab Spring, Mindy seemed to go into top gear with an even greater belief in the need to keep people informed and the importance of openness. Still, at the same time, she was very proud of being Egyptian and told me she considered herself lucky to call Egypt her home. "Living here is like being on a permanent vacation," she had said. A husband and wife team Working with her husband, she led international campaigns against bird hunting, helped inform government environmental policy and campaigned to conserve any precious piece of nature that came under threat. Environmental journalist Arwa Aburawa first met Mindy Baha El Din in 2011 "We both have a strong sense of civic duty," she explained. "We have tried our best to make a difference, but it has been an uphill struggle." The one thing that struck me whenever I interviewed Mindy Baha El Din was just how optimistic she was. Even after the revolution which toppled Mubarak threatened to push environmental issues further down the political agenda, she saw new opportunities and new potential in the young people who flooded the streets. "What is very exciting after the revolution is all these creative, talented and bright young people," she said. "They are the nation’s capital and future. They want to be involved in improving their nation. It is up to us environmental campaigners to find ways to engage and channel their energies," she said. Last Thursday (14.03.2013) Mindy suffered a stroke and was hospitalized. During an operation a later later she fell into a coma. She passed away early on the following Monday morning. Her wake will be held later this week in Cairo and is open to the public. Arwa Aburawa is a freelance journalist specialising in environmental issues in Cairo, Egypt.


Power struggles define the Middle East in 2013 A military coup in Egypt, assassinations in Tunisia, civil war in Syria: The Middle East saw heavy power struggles this year. DW reviews key developments in countries still grappling with the effects of the Arab Spring. Egypt: The old guard returns Mohammed Morsi is furious. Standing upright in his cage, he shouts at the judge in an unwavering voice, "You have no right to convict me. I'm your president!" The deposed Egyptian president has been on trial since November on charges of conspiracy to murder. If he's found guilty, he faces life in jail or the death penalty. Just recently he was serving as the country's democratically elected leader; now he's being tried as a criminal. Morsi is the region's biggest political loser this year. In July 2013 the Egyptian military put an end to Morsi's brief rule, following massive demonstrations. "Egypt's old regime is back in power," comments Guido Steinberg, a Middle East expert at the German Institute for International and Security Affairs (SWP). The Muslim Brotherhood, which until a few months ago held both the presidency, with Morsi, and a parliamentary majority, is now banned. The leaders of the political alliance have all been arrested, and thousands of their supporters have been killed. "The military regime is now taking very decisive action to destroy the Muslim Brotherhood," says Guido Steinberg, "more decisive than Mubarak [Ed. note: Hosni Mubarak, the Egyptian president deposed in 2011] ever was on the matter." The head of Egypt's military, Abdel Fattah al-Sisi, appointed the country's current leader The country's military has gone after both sides of the political spectrum: the Muslim Brotherhood on the right, and liberal revolutionaries on the left. The latter have taken little action in response. They're both tired and frustrated from the enduring struggle for power in Egypt. Although many observers are skeptical, the Egyptian military has repeatedly given assurances that it does not want to remain in power indefinitely. The Military Council says it plans to have a new constitution in place in 2014, which will be followed by parliamentary and presidential elections. Until then, interim President Adli Mansur, appointed by the Egyptian army's Commander-in-Chief Abdel Fattah al-Sisi, will continue to govern the country. Tunisia: Hardening fronts The Arab Spring began in 2011 in Tunisia. The first election brought the moderate Islamists of the Ennahda party to power. Its leaders have trembled at the political developments in Egypt. The fate of the Muslim Brotherhood there represents a nightmare for Tunisian Islamists. Tunisian leaders are acutely aware that protesters could topple the government again Meanwhile, the country is facing its own share of problems. In late July 2013, the left-wing opposition figure Mohammed Brahmi was murdered. Members of Ennahda blamed radical Salafists, while Tunisia's opposition party has implicated Ennahda itself. Brahmi's death mobilized tens of thousands of Tunisians to take to the streets in protest. In order to avoid an escalation of the protests, Ennahda ultimately agreed to a "national dialogue" with the opposition. This is set to involve a new constitution, a reform of voting laws and, ultimately, fresh elections. But moving ahead with those plans has proved difficult. Until now, the country's parties have been unable to agree on a new prime minister. Tunisia offers a second case in which the party leaders ousted in the 2011 revolution still have strong influence with the country's security personnel. "Ennahda is cooperating with the old powers in the country," says Middle East expert Hamadi El-Aouni of the Free University of Berlin. Libya: Powerless central government Libya has descended deeper and deeper into chaos in 2013. The authority of its central government scarcely extends beyond the borders of the capital, Tripoli. Militias control the rest of the country, where regional powers and representatives of divergent ideologies violently struggle for power. "It's a civil war of various tribes and regions," explains Hamadi El-Aouni. Interim Prime Minister Ali Zeidan heads a government with little power The central government is powerless against the militias, as even interim Prime Minister Ali Zeidan has admitted. In October, he was kidnapped for several hours by one such militia. He and the General National Congress, the parliament elected democratically in summer 2012, face massive criticism. Their critics say they've done little to address the country's problems. Zeidan's period as interim head of state comes to an end in February 2014. He has yet to even begin his intended task, which is to work out a constitution. A 60-person constitutional commission isn't scheduled to be chosen until 2014. But the analyst El-Aouni does not believe that Libya's old powers will return to the helm. "They no longer exist; they're gone," he says. "Neutralized, or out of the country." Syria: The civil war continues Syrian leader Bashar Assad is once again sitting firmly in the saddle. In 2013, the Syrian army was able to recapture a number of rebel strongholds. "The army controls up to around 80 percent of the territory again," says El-Aouni. 2013 proved a good year for Syrian leader Bashar Assad and his forces Politically, Assad is also no longer as isolated as he was in 2012. He's indispensible to those who would seek a peace treaty in the country, and his deal on destroying Syrian chemical weapons arsenals turned him into a negotiation partner for the West. Furthermore, after the vacillations of 2013, it seems clear that in the near term at least there will be no military campaign against the country from abroad. "The Americans aren't daring to try a war," says El-Aouni. Meanwhile, the opposition in Syria is more splintered than ever. It is divided into various groups and associations rooted both within and beyond the country. In some cases, the groups are now fighting against each other. Over the course of the year, many have grown even more radical. No end in sight for the revolution Military coups, assassinations, civil war - 2013 was a tumultuous year in the Middle East. But that comes as no surprise to the SWP's Guido Steinberg, who says, "The beginning of the Arab Spring in 2011 was just the prelude to a series of years in which changes are taking place. Of course, we're not going to like all of them." However, the researcher sees little reason for resignation, saying that, on the whole, the region is undergoing a "positive development." In his view, the Middle East will profit in the long term from the revolutionary movements that began in 2011, likely resulting in the end in a region that's more democratic than ever before.


Leftist candidate demands Egypt vote recount A leftist candidate has demanded a partial vote recount of the first round of Egypt's presidential election, citing violations. Hamdeem Sabahi polled third place and failed to qualify for next month's runoff. The two surviving candidates in Egypt's landmark presidential election set about gathering support from defeated first-round candidates on Saturday to boost their chances in next month's runoff vote. But leftist contender Hamdeem Sabahi wasn't prepared to give up without a fight. Sabahi, who came in third by a margin of some 700,000 votes, called for a recount of the first-round election late on Saturday, saying voting violations had cheated him out of a spot as one of the final two. "We have information that conscripts voted illegally," Sabahi told a raucous crowd of supporters outside his campaign headquarters. "We will not give up the rights of Egyptians." The move is likely to further complicate the runoff election, which will pit vastly polarized candidates Ahmed Shafiq and Mohammed Morsi against one another. According to unofficial preliminary counts, Morsi, the Muslim Brotherhood candidate, has a slight lead on his opponent after winning 25.3 percent in the first-round vote. A former prime minister under Hosni Mubarak, Shafiq secured 24.9 percent of the vote, while Sabahi was said to have followed closely, with 21.5 percent. The choice between Morsi and Shafiq, who represent forces that have battled for the past six decades, has dismayed many Egyptians who voted for candidates offering a middle ground. Both are now seeking the support of the 11 other candidates who did not make it into the runoff. Appealing to opposition Shafiq sought to play down his ties to the former regime on Saturday, promising that Egypt had entered a new era. "I promise all Egyptians that we will begin a new era," Shafiq said. "There is no turning back. We will not reproduce the past." "Your revolution has been hijacked and I am committed to bringing [it] back," he told a news conference. The Muslim Brotherhood, meanwhile, sought to rally the opposition behind Morsi. The Arab world's most influential Islamist organization painted Shafiq as a threat to the uprising that brought down the authoritarian Mubarak regime in February 2011. "We call on all sincere political and national forces to unite to protect the revolution and to achieve the pledges we took before our great nation," the Brotherhood said in a statement. "Today we face desperate attempts to reproduce the old regime," the Brotherhood added.  The runoff is scheduled to take place on June 16-17. ccp/ncy (AFP, AP, Reuters)


West caught in dilemma over Egypt The West is stuck in a dilemma over Egypt - it cannot endorse Mohammed Morsi's overthrow, but neither does it want to condemn the coup. On top of that, the US and the EU barely have any leverage over Cairo. The western governments are caught on the horns of a dilemma over Egypt. Their silence on the military putsch against elected president Mohammed Morsi makes their insistence on democracy appear dishonest, but if they condemn Morsi's removal on July 3 too strongly, and refuse to cooperate with the new interim government, they will be relinquishing whatever influence they still have in Cairo. According to Günter Meyer, director of the Center for Research into the Arab World at the University of Mainz, the West is desperate to maintain some kind of influence over Egypt, which has played a key role in US and European Middle East strategy for decades. Moreover, the fall of the Muslim Brotherhood is not exactly a bad thing for either the US or the German government, Mayer told DW, even though it conflicts with the West's claim of upholding democratic values: "Whichever way you want to turn it, it's clear that this is a military putsch." Thousands of people turned out in Cairo to support the military coup in July Democracy no priority under Mubarak "We haven't just been stuck in this dilemma since Morsi's removal," says Christian Achrainer, Egypt expert at the German Council on Foreign Relations (DGAP). Even during the long reign of dictator Hosni Mubarak, which ended in 2011, the West valued stability above all else. The US and the EU were interested mainly in the security of their energy supply, the fight against terrorism, and the continuation of the peace agreement between Egypt and Israel. Calls for democracy and respect for human rights were kept in the background. After the 2011 revolution, politicians and diplomats were forced into balancing strategic interests and rhetoric. Right now, hardly anyone in the West wants Morsi to be returned to office. And yet the call for power to be handed to a new elected government is at the top of the list of demands. The priority for governments in Europe and the US is that there is no further escalation of violence. German Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle called on the Egyptian authorities to "allow peaceful demonstrations and do everything to prevent further escalation," while the EU called for the release of all political prisoners, including Morsi. EU High Representative for Foreign Affairs Catherine Ashton, currently in Egypt, wants to move both the interim government and the Muslim Brotherhood, which supports Morsi, to dialogue. US Secretary of State John Kerry, for his part, also called for an end to the bloodshed. Last weekend alone, at least 80 people were killed in violent clashes on the streets. No pressure on Cairo Beyond the calls for calm, dialogue, and the return to democracy, the question remains: what leverage does the West have? The US transfers $1.5 billion (1.1 billion euros) to the Egyptian military every year. According to US law, this aid cannot be given to a government that has come to power through a coup. According to Meyer, the Egyptian military knows only too well that Washington will not stop the payments: the strategic cooperation with the Egyptian army is simply too important to the US. The US government has put its national interests first and refused to describe the removal of Morsi as a coup. "This law has not shown itself to be a real weapon in any attempt to reverse the military coup or to apply pressure," says Meyer. At the same time, thousands of Morsi's supporters were outraged by his overthrow The EU, for its part, barely has any leverage to influence developments in Cairo. Brussels can attach its aid and development programs to certain conditions, but Achrainer thinks that will have little impact. For one thing, the crisis-ridden EU lacks the financial means to make offers that could move the powerbrokers in Cairo to change course. For another thing, it is difficult for EU member states to find common ground for such offers. Achrainer thinks that easier access for Egyptian agricultural produce would be something that would interest the leadership in Cairo. But "while the Scandinavian countries may be ready to open the market in agricultural areas, the southern European states would be against it." No one to talk to It's not only leverage that's lacking. Achrainer says that there are few negotiating partners in Egypt willing to talk about democracy. The most important players in the country's escalating power struggle are the Muslim Brotherhood and the military. "Neither of them are players that you would really call pro-democratic," says Achrainer. "At the moment, we don't have any real partners to support." On top of that, he added, a one-sided show of support for this or that camp would create widespread outrage in the divided country. Achrainer believes that the best course of action for the West at the moment is restraint. There is little to be gained from any kind of dogmatic demand. On top of this, contacts will have to be re-built with several political groups. "In the current crisis, we unfortunately just have to accept that the opportunities for having any influence are very slight," he concludes.


Gaza crisis ups pressure on Egypt's Morsi After the Israeli attacks on Gaza, Egypt's President Mohammed Morsi is under increasing pressure to balance domestic and international expectations. Further escalation could threaten the peace treaty with Israel. It was only a few hundred Islamists that gathered at Cario's Tahrir Square after Friday prayers, shouting angrily in protest of the attacks on Gaza and calling for the end of the state of Israel. Through a megaphone, a Salafist preacher condemned the US and Europe, calling the states liars for still supporting Israel. The dictators once supported by the West had disappeared and now it was time for the Muslims, he told the angry crowd, recalling the West's decades-long support of pro-Israeli dictators like former Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak. But the situation remained calm: essentially, the demonstrators supported the line of their government under President Morsi. "It was right that Morsi withdrew the Egyptian ambassador from Israel," said 33-year old Mohammed, one of the protesters. "And it was also right that he sent the prime minister to visit Gaza." Massive domestic pressure Israel's attacks have caused widespread destruction in Gaza Early on, Morsi exhausted all diplomatic measures to protest Israel's attacks on Hamas in Gaza. He described the air raids as "inacceptable" and called for the UN Security Council to get involved. But he knew very well that this measure would bring nothing, as Israel's main international ally, the US, has a veto right in the Council. Opening the border crossing to Gaza at Rafah to get wounded Palestinians into Egyptian hospitals was also not a big step. Morsi had to go further and send Prime Minister Hesham Kandil to Gaza in order to live up to the domestic pressure. "Now we have freedom," said Nour El-Din Selim, a Salafist demonstrator. "We can openly say what we think and take to the streets to support Gaza. Had we done this under Mubarak, we would probably have ended up in prison." The pressure on Morsi is enormous. No matter how much Egypt's parties are quarrelling with each other, they are all united in their hatred of Israel. A feeble reaction by Morsi would lead to an immediate drop in his popularity levels. Parliamentary elections are already planned for next year, and before that there's to be a referendum on the new constitution. The leadership of the Muslim Brotherhood, Morsi's political home, on Thursday called for protests. The fact that Morsi sent his prime minister on a three-hour trip to Gaza earned him a lot of admiration from many Egyptians, including from protester Nour El-Din. "It was a good step; it shows the people in Palestine that the Egyptian people and the government are with them and that they are not alone," he said. Morsi has to juggle domestic, Arab and Western expectations Mediating between Israel and Hamas? Whether the visit to Gaza goes beyond mere symbolic significance remains to be seen. Earlier, US President Barack Obama called on Morsi to help negotiate between Israel and the radical Islamic Hamas in charge of administrating Gaza. However, the words of Prime Minister Kandil in Gaza were unlikely to have pleased Israel. At one stage he said that "the Egyptian revolution will not cease to work toward ending this attack, establishing a cease-fire that will last until there's a fair and comprehensive peace, and until there's a Palestinian state with Jerusalem as a capital." That last condition is unlikely to have much support from Israel, and if Kandil's words were anything more than just propaganda, it'll be hard to see them as an attempt to mediate. But Morsi can't afford to fall out with the US entirely. He needs to get his country's ailing economy back on track. Without an economic resurgence, the Muslim Brotherhood, and Morsi, will not be able to solidify their power. And it's the US that will essentially decide whether Egypt will get the money it so desperately needs from the International Monetary Fund (IMF) - one of the reasons Morsi has so far not called into question his country's peace treaty with Israel. But, should Israel launch a ground offensive into Gaza, Morsi would find himself with his back to the wall, for there's a lot of anger in Egypt about the US support of Israel. "Why do Obama and the US government believe that Israel has the right to kill Palestinian women and children, or destroy civilian buildings and schools, basically destroy an entire people? Is that what they see as human rights?" asked protester Ahmed Fuad. Giving in to the US and Israel would seriously damage Morsi's credibility. The anger among Egyptians over Israel and the US could even force Morsi to insist on renegotiating the peace treaty with Tel Aviv. A further escalation of Israel's operation against Gaza, therefore, is a great danger for Egyptian-Israeli relations.


Clashes at Cairo university turn deadly Several have died in clashes near a Cairo university that broke out soon after the interim president appealed for calm. Meanwhile, the family of ousted President Morsi has threatened legal action if he is not released. The death toll in Egypt rose on Tuesday as Health Ministry officials confirmed six fatalities from clashes that had taken place close to Cairo's main university overnight. Fighting had broken out between supporters of deposed President Mohammed Morsi who were staging a sit-in nearby, and opponents of the ousted leader. Al-Ahram newspaper reported that six had died, citing a health official speaking on the conditition of anonymity. The Muslim Brotherhood's Freedom and Justice Party also confirmed the reports of new deaths. "Leaders of the military coup continue to terrorize the peaceful protesters in Egypt," the Muslim Brotherhood claimed on its website Tuesday. The latest violence came on the anniversary of Egypt's 1952 revolution, which overthrew the country's 150-year-old monarchy, and just hours after interim President Adly Mansour had used the occasion to appeal for calm and reconciliation. "We want to open a new page in the book of the history of the nation without rancor, hatred or confrontation," Mansour said Monday night. "It's high time to build a country that has reconciled with the past in order to build the future." Tensions have worsened on the street between those calling for Morsi's return to power as Egypt's elected president and those who support the the formation of a new government. Violence sparked by the unrest has claimed over 100 lives since the military removed Morsi from power in early July. The Muslim Brotherhood has rejected the authority of interim government, led by President Mansour, Prime Minister Hazem el-Beblawi and a 35-member Cabinet. Family wants to see Morsi Morsi's disappearance has contributed to the turmoil gripping Egypt. The military has neither disclosed his location, nor allowed him to show any sign of life to the outside world in almost three weeks. The deposed leader's family has threatened to seek international justice if Morsi continues to be held in isolation and without charge. "We accuse [Egyptian army chief Abdel Fattah] al-Sissi and the group that supported the coup of kidnapping the citizen and president, Mohammed Morsi," his son Osama told a Monday press conference in the capital city. "We are taking local and international legal measures against Abdel Fattah al-Sissi, the leader of the bloody miltiary coup, and his putschist group," Morsi's daughter, Shaimaa Mohamed Morsi, said. The military maintains that it has chosen to withhold information on the ex-president's whereabouts as a safety measure. On July 3, the military seized control of the government in direct response to mass demonstrations calling for Morsi's removal. The opposition - driven by a group called Tamarod that accumulated millions of signatures, according to its own account - had demanded new elections because Morsi had failed to uphold the goals of the revolution that toppled Hosni Mubarak in 2011. kms/tj (AP, AFP, Reuters, dpa)


Democracy: a never-ending battle Democracy is a topic of great importance for Deutsche Welle. In this special, we present young people who assist the development of their countries - and we encourage debate about the future of political participation. Deutsche Welle has dealt with the issues of democracy and human rights over several decades - DW reporters were there to witness the Carnation Revolution in Portugal in 1974, as well as the peaceful revolutions in Europe's Eastern Bloc in the late 1980s. Today, they are following uprisings in countries such as Tunisia, Egypt and Syria through their online, TV and radio reports. A constant factor in all these revolutions is the people's desire to have a say in the political decisions that affect their lives: the desire for democracy. That's because democracy carries many promises and offers the chance to make politics fair and inclusive. The big questions Through its multimedia reports in several languages and interactive features, DW's "Power to the People" special takes a look at the big questions surrounding the future of political participation. It shows why people all over the world are demanding change - including the various protest movements that have formed in recent years, like the Arab Spring. Meanwhile, in eastern Europe, people are mostly protesting against political patronage and corruption. Several brave individuals have called for more oversight and have sought help in the West. But spurred by the current financial crisis, even countries with long-established democracies are now on a quest for change. Many people in EU countries and the United States have protested against the perceived dominance of the financial markets and the disempowerment of democratically elected leaders. We ask: what do the different protest movements around the world have in common? How can change happen? And, more importantly, how can democracy be reestablished? While the rhetoric and demands of different activists vary greatly, the majority of those active are young people fighting,in their own ways, for a voice. They question established power structures, often with the help of modern media and technology, and search for new ways to codetermine the future of their countries. Courage to change These very actions represent the basic foundations of democracy: involvement, variety and the courage to change - because democracy never just "arrives," and it should never be taken for granted. It is something that has to keep reinventing itself; it is repeatedly renegotiated and won through struggle. And it involves tireless, resilient individuals who dare to believe in a brighter future and take action. Such people are the central figures in our special. There is the young Egyptian activist who camped out for weeks on Tahrir Square and is now informing the residents of Cairo's poorest districts about their democratic rights. There is also the brave Ukrainian journalist who continues her investigative research in the face of censorship and intimidation. And there is the Spanish designer who aims to make his country's economic system more democratic, and who has already convinced numerous businesses to contribute more to the common good. But you, the users, can get involved too! you have the opportunity, on our social media channels, to discuss some of the biggest democracy-related questions. Tell us how much responsibility you think the West should take for the democratization of other countries, how digital media may help make revolutions more possible, or whether you think that democracy and economy hinder each other. We want to hear your opinion on all this, and more. You will find inspiration for your thoughts in powerful and controversial essays written for DW by renowned authors and intellectuals from various countries. Social networks create more room for debate For 60 years now, DW has been committed to conveying liberal values, fostering civil society and advocating democracy around the world. Its multimedia and social media presence creates new ways of leading debates on these topics. "Power to the People" is just one example of DW's cooperation with its partners. The special features the "Mapping Democracy" segment - a project conceptualized by the Goethe Institut and supervised by DW as media partner. I welcome you to share your thoughts and look forward to your comments! Follow us on Twitter and Facebook.


Islamists gather in support of Egpytian President Morsi Islamist supporters of Egypt's Mohammed Morsi have rallied in support of the under-fire president. The demonstration comes one day after the mass protests against the country's newly drafted constitutional charter. Thousands of Egyptians converged on Cairo Saturday in a show of support for Morsi, his controversial decrees and the recently passed draft constitution. The rally, centered outside Cairo University, was called by the Muslim Brotherhood, which backed Morsi, and its Islamist allies. Protesters countered with mass demonstrations against Morsi's recently issued presidential decrees, which gave him broad new powers including immunity from judicial review of his actions, and legal immunity for the Islamist-dominated assembly that drafted the country's new constitution. The opposition called the new draft constitution, hastily adopted early Friday morning, "flawed" and "half baked." It is expected to go to a popular referendum within two weeks. Pro-Morsi rally By midmorning Saturday, hundreds of pro-Morsi demonstrators were gathered at the university, waving Egyptian flags and holding up pictures of the president. "The people want the implementation of God's law," chanted the crowd, with one banner reading, "The Muslim Brotherhood supports President Morsi's decisions." The Muslim Brotherhood and its allies have said they will avoid Tahrir Square, where anti-Morsi protesters remained camped out into Saturday. Protests across country Other protests took place Friday in Alexandria and the Nile Delta town of Al-Mahalla Al-Kobra, where clashes were reported between anti-government protesters and supporters of Morsi. Two people have been killed and hundreds more wounded since demonstrations began following Morsi's issuing of the decrees on November 22. dr/rc (dpa, AFP, Reuters, AP)


Egypt's military regime tolerates xenophobia Egypt has been flooded by a wave of xenophobia. Not only Americans, but above all Palestinians and Syrians are suffering from regime-tolerated media agitation against foreigners. Foreigners don't have it easy right now in Egypt. Fuelled by state-tolerated media agitation, many Egyptians have begun to eye foreigners with suspicion or even treat them with outright hostility. The United States has become a target of bi-partisan scorn. At both Islamist and secular demonstrations, one can see countless crossed-out portraits of US President Barack Obama. Many demonstrators also carry photos of the US ambassador with hateful insults written on them. Hardly a single demonstrator has anything good to say about Americans these days. Anti-Morsi demonstrators accuse the US of having looked the other way, while the Muslim Brotherhood became increasingly authoritarian. The Islamists, on the other hand, hate the US because Washington supposedly allowed Mohammed Morsi to be ousted from power. Many Egyptians have become increasingly obsessed with conspiracy theories. "We had democracy, but the military didn't want that," Mohammed Hassen, an Islamist, told DW. "Europe and the US put a lot of pressure on the military to overthrow Morsi, because they wanted to have their own interests in Egypt." Syrians live in fear But the agitation against Syrian refugees and Palestinians has taken on much more serious dimensions. Since the first violent clashes between followers of the Muslim Brotherhood and anti-Morsi demonstrators, Syrians and Palestinians have been turned into scapegoats. The military and security agencies claim that the Muslim Brotherhood paid Syrian refugees to shoot at soldiers and anti-Morsi demonstrators. Public as well as private television broadcasters have spread this rumor, launching a veritable hate campaign against Palestinians and Syrians. US Ambassador Anne Patterson has become a target of scorn in Egypt Mostafa El-Gindi, a former parliamentarian, suggested on the private broadcaster ONTV that the streets should be sealed off near flashpoints and checkpoints erected there. That way "the non-Egyptians" could be identified. The Syrians and Palestinians caught at the checkpoints should be executed, El-Gindi said. This kind of agitation finds fertile ground among some segments of the population. Most Egyptians are very nationalistic and worship the military. Some have come to view all Syrians as enemies of state, due to the rumors that they were paid to attack the military. For Syrians who've fled the violence in their homeland, this is a troubling development. "It affects me, because now I can't move freely as before, especially going to the hotspots like downtown," Ahmed, a 27-year-old Syrian, told DW. "It makes me sad whenever I'm sitting in a café and listening to people talking badly about Syrians." Visa requirements changed During President Morsi's year in office, Syrians were allowed to enter Egypt without a visa. But the situation has changed dramatically since the military coup d'état. Due to the growing xenophobia, many Syrians leave their homes only when it's absolutely necessary. They are afraid of getting caught up in a police checkpoint and being deported back to their war-torn homeland. The military-installed government now requires Syrians to apply for a visa before entering Egypt. For Syrians who want to flee the civil war at home, entry into Egypt has become extremely difficult. "The Egyptian authorities at the airport two weeks ago…sent [back] two planes," said Ahmed. "One of them came from Beirut and the other from Damascus. They sent them back with all passengers." Anti-Morsi demonstrators accuse the US of turning the other cheek The passengers on board didn't know about the new visa rules, which had been implemented overnight. Palestinians under suspicion Palestinians are anything but welcome in Egypt these days. Because of the bad media reporting, they are suspected of having connections with Hamas, which has its roots in the Muslim Brotherhood. Hamas is being blamed for the much of the violence in Egypt. The detained ex-president, Mohammed Morsi, has been accused of escaping from jail with the help of Hamas during the 2011 revolution against Hosni Mubarak. The current military-backed regime has capitalized on xenophobia in Egypt to kill two birds with one stone. On the one hand, the military can represent itself as the country's savior against foreign conspirators. On the other hand, it can play down its own violent crackdown, which most recently killed 50 Islamist protesters, and push the blame onto Palestinians and Syrians. And in the process, the Islamists are further discredited.


Opinion: Mideast must change mindset The change needed to bring about a new, democratic Middle East can only come from within, says DW's Naser Schruf. It's the only way to effectively counter terrorist groups like the "Islamic State." It wasn't that long ago that the world witnessed the wave of revolt across the Arab world, as the oppressed pushed back against repressive dictatorships. "Jasmine Revolution," "Arab Spring," "Facebook Revolution" - these concepts dominated the headlines in the Western media, and euphorically seemed to herald a "new" democratic and pluralistic Middle East and North Africa. Pictures of civilized, peacefully demonstrating young Arabs were seen around the world, their only weapons the Internet, blogs and social networks like Facebook and Twitter. Who could forget the scene where protesting Muslims in Cairo prayed in Tahrir Square and were protected from police violence by their Christian Coptic comrades? The conviction and enthusiasm with which these young people fought for democracy, freedom, human dignity and tolerance, their joy and courage as they rebelled against repressive regimes - all of this was real and palpable. And it filled me, as a German Arab, with a great sense of pride. It was understandable that many commentators felt that a "new" Middle East was emerging - even if the word "new" was not really used at the time. But the pace at which the powerful autocratic governments in countries like Tunisia, Egypt and Yemen collapsed was overwhelming and seemed to herald an epochal change. What has remained since then? Not much; in fact, just the opposite. The Middle East does have a "new" face. But it's an ugly one. Naser Schruf is head of DW's Arab department Grim outlook It's not just that disillusionment has set in. The uprising took a repressive turn long ago, starting in 2011 with the armed conflict in Libya and culminating in the bloody civil war in Syria that has cost countless lives and continues today. Darkness and uncertainty has fallen over the Arab world. The peaceful demonstrators of the Arab Spring now find themselves sidelined, or even in prison. Instead, civil wars, ethnic cleansing, decay and destruction now dominate. And in several countries in the region, it's now armed men with long beards and a perverse pleasure in killing that are calling the shots. In Syria and Iraq, "Islamic State" (IS) militants now control an area larger than countries like Jordan or Lebanon. There, they have terrorized anyone not prepared to submit to their self-declared caliphate, a territory ruled by Islamic law. In fact, this is only a pseudo-religious disguise for their reign of fear and terror. These are bitter developments. The Middle East was once famous for its mosaic of different cultures, ethnic groups and religious traditions. Today it's increasingly marked by dividing lines that keep people apart or set them against each other with brutal violence. Images of Christians protecting Muslims, or vice versa - nowhere to be seen! Instead, we see images of mass executions, destroyed Shiite shrines and fleeing Christians and Yazidis who have been brutally expelled from their traditional settlements in Iraq and Syria. Thousands have left their homeland for Europe or America. What we are now witnessing is one of the darkest and saddest chapters in the recent history of the Middle East. The "Islamic State" is threatening a new wave of repression in the Middle East Devastating outcome All this is a truly devastating outcome for the Arab Spring - especially as it seems that elsewhere, the core problems that first sparked the upheaval only appear to be resolved on the surface. Take, for example, Egypt. The Egyptian people may have indeed have toppled their strongman leader. But the current president, General Abdel Fattah al-Sisi, so far doesn't seem to be leading his country to a democratic future any more than his ousted predecessor, the Muslim Brotherhood's Mohammed Morsi did. And the rest of the world? The authoritarian governments in Russia and China never really warmed to the events of the Arab Spring in the first place. Iran, from the beginning, chose to be selective and still today only supports those rebellions that serve its ideology and interests. And the West now pushes for stability in the Middle East at almost any price, rather than actively promoting democracy and pluralism, a stance forced upon it by terrorist groups like the "Islamic State." But it should not be overlooked that, despite sympathy for the Arab Spring movement, there has never been a real turning point in relations between the West - particularly the United States - and Saudi Arabia, even though the latter is home to one of the region's most repressive regimes. From an Arab point of view, complaints about the West's approach are indeed justified. But it will not help the region out of its current mess. It's up to the citizens of the Arab world themselves to bring about change: their current government leaders are unable and largely unwilling to even make the necessary moves. What's needed now is not just a generational change, but also a change in mindset. The new generation must not only know how to deal with Internet and social media, they must also be able to better organize themselves in a sustainable way, both politically and socially. And they must find a common mindset that makes it impossible to abandon the necessary reforms in the face of sectarian differences or terrorist actions.


Opinion: Gloomy prospects on the Nile The forced removal of Mohammed Morsi has intensified the polarization of Egypt. To stop the country becoming ungovernable, all the political forces need to be brought into the transition process, says DW's Loay Mudhoon. There's no question - the military coup centered on Defense Minister Abdel-Fattah el-Sissi was cleverly staged. Flanked by the highest religious authorities in the country - the Grand Sheikh Ahmed el-Tayeb of Al-Azhar University, Coptic Pope Tawadros II, the internationally respected opposition politician and Nobel Peace Prize laureate Mohammed ElBaradei, plus representatives of the Tamarod movement - the army chief announced the end of the failed presidency of Mohammed Morsi and the suspension of the constitution. But this skilful staging cannot disguise the fact that this putsch against a democratically-elected president has set a dangerous precedent. It's by no means a "second revolution," as representatives of the anti-Morsi opposition movement claim. Loay Mudhoon is an expert on the Islamic world at DW The power struggle between the Islamist and "liberal" camps was not decided by the successful mass mobilization of June 30, but by the intervention of the army. We have found out since the events that the army leadership's decision to act against Morsi was taken some days before the mass protests. Even the opportunistic participation of the Salafist al-Nour party, ("the Party of Light") as a representative of the Islamist camp in the militarily organized "disempowerment ceremony," does not change that. For this reason it is important that we give this seizure of power by the Egyptian military its rightful name: it was an illegal putsch and a blow to the democratization process. Not unavoidable There is no doubt that Morsi showed himself incapable of governing what is the largest Arab country in the world. Above all, he failed dismally to unify this politically divided country and become the president of all Egyptians. This was probably no way around that, seeing that he was only elected by a narrow majority in the election a year ago. On top of this, the apparent inability of his government to work efficiently to end the urgent economic problems affecting the population was also devastating. It did precious little to combat the high unemployment, inflation, and the shortage of fuel. But was the army's intervention even necessary to cut short Morsi's tenure? When one considers that Morsi's authority was already eroding following the mega-demonstrations, one has to doubt it. A questionable alliance against Morsi Now it is clear that the anti-Morsi alliance has missed a historic chance to allow the Muslim Brotherhood - the main representatives of Islamism - to truly fail politically. Instead, the Islamists have been handed a chance to create a new myth of martyrdom for themselves. Following their experiences in Algeria in 1992, when army generals denied the Islamic Salvation Front an electoral victory, the Cairo Islamists of 2013 will be able to claim that whenever they win a democratic victory, they are forcibly removed. It is also not at all clear whether the heterogeneous and chronically divided anti-Morsi opposition was in a position to challenge the Islamists politically. By refusing to take part in any dialogue with the ex-president, and by announcing that they were going to boycott the parliamentary elections planned in the spring, they contributed to the blockade that stalled the country. Their alliance with henchmen from the old, discredited Mubarak regime also throws up some uncomfortable questions. If the so-called "anti-Morsi alliance" believes that the military was simply carrying out the will of the people and acting in the spirit of democracy, then it is simply naïve: the generals' main aim is to defend their privileges. The army is a well-known hive of corruption and controls at least a quarter of the Egyptian economy. And when it was in power during the first two years following Mubarak's fall, it completely failed in the administration of the state. The removal of Morsi not only intensifies the polarization of Egypt. It threatens to make a country of some 90 million people completely ungovernable and places it on the edge of collapse. In order to stop that from coming about, all the political forces must be brought into a new transition process - especially the Muslim Brotherhood, which remains the best-organized power in the country. Any attempts to establish a new political order in a post-Morsi Egypt without them can have little chance of success. For that reason, German and European governments should call for the witch hunt against the Muslim Brothers and their leadership to be stopped immediately - and for the generals to make good on their promises of a new constitution and imminent elections.


Pro-Morsi Islamists shot dead during protest Shots have been fired at sit-in outside of the building where ousted leader Mohammed Morsi is thought to be being held. This came just hours before the interim government was expected to name a new premier. At least 15 people, including an army officer, died early on Monday when shots were fired on a demonstration outside of the Republican Guard barracks in Cairo, according to the Muslim Brotherhood. The military has been holding Morsi there since removing him from power last week. The Muslim Brotherhood blamed the deaths on Egyptian security forces who had been attempting to disperse the crowd. Military officials speaking on the condition of anonymity said the violence began when an unidentified group attempted to storm the building. However, they have not confirmed who was responsible for the casualties. Several people were killed at the same site late last week. Egypt awaits new premier Reports of the early morning violence came hours before the country's interim government, which took office following Morsi's removal, was expected to announce a new caretaker prime minister. Permalink http://p.dw.com/p/193PS On Saturday, interim President Adly Mansour's office went back on a decision to appoint opposition leader Mohamed ElBaradei to the prime minister's post, following an objection by el-Nour. The group says ElBaradei, a Nobel Peace Prize winner and top opponent of Morsi, would have been a divisive premier. Early on Monday, the news agency AFP quoted Mansour's media advisor, Ahmed al-Muslimani, as saying the president favored appointing center-left lawyer Ziad Bahaa Eldin as prime minister and ElBaradei as vice president. However el-Nour has also refused to back Eldin as prime minister, because he used to belong to ElBaradei's National Salvation Front coalition. "We don't object to [Eldin] personally, he is an economic pillar," the party's head Younes Makhyoun told the Al-Arabiya television channel. "We reject his candidacy because he belonged to the National Salvation Front," he said. "Our position is that the prime minister should not belong to a specific faction...We want a technocrat," Makhyoun told the Associated Press. Weekend protests The news comes after tens of thousands of protesters again flooded Egyptian streets on the weekend, in rallies in support of and against Morsi. Thousands of supporters are camped out in a suburb of northeastern Cairo, and have refused to move until the former president is reinstated. Opponents of Morsi's Muslim Brotherhood called for a demonstration of support for the military handover in the city's Tahrir Square on Sunday. Air force jets flew above the square, drawing a smoke trail representing the Egyptian flag in the sky. The Tamarod movement, which staged the June 30 rallies that resulted in Morsi's overthrow, urged people to gather at Tahrir and the Ittihadiya presidential palace to "complete the revolution." The military deployed troops at points throughout the capital, amid fears of violence between the two groups. An army statement warned against "provocative actions," vowing that violations would be "dealt with decisively, under the law." Although the Brotherhood has refused to take any part in the new political system, ElBaradei has called for the "inclusion of the Brotherhood in the democratization process." "No one should be taken to court without a convincing reason. Former President Morsi must be treated with dignity," he told Germany's Spiegel weekly. German Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle on Sunday said that German support for the new administration depended on a return to democratic transition. "This is the standard by which we will judge the new government in Cairo," said Westerwelle. "The more clear the democratic transformation becomes, the more committed Germany will be in its support." jr,kms/pfd (Reuters, AFP,dpa)


'Finally we have our country back' Egypt's Mohammed Morsi has been ousted from power after days of pressure from the military, but more importantly from the people on the streets. The mood is one of jubilation, but also apprehension as to what comes next. For hours the crowd waited in anxious anticipation, chanting and cheering in a sea of waving flags. Then, when the announcement came from General Abdel-Fattah el-Sisi that the military had taken control of the country, Tahrir Square erupted in euphoric celebration. "This is a victory for the people of Egypt," said Samia Abdel Elrasal, a 50-year-old housewife sitting in a café overlooking Tahrir Square. "Finally we have our country back." But as emotions run high and celebrations continue, what could come next in Egypt is unclear. "I just want our country to be back on the right path, I want my children to have a better future," said 53-year-old Mahmoud Kdr Mustafa, in Tahrir Square as bursting fireworks illuminated the sky. "We don't know what is going to happen, but we are finally hopeful again." Adly Mansour, the president of Egypt's Supreme Constitutional Court will run the country until a new president is elected. Sisi also revealed plans that a technocratic government representing diverse sections of society, and a committee woul be established to review the constitution. He also gave the military arrest powers for "anyone who acts outside the law." In the days leading up to the announcement, some anti-Morsi protesters expressed reservations at the return of the military that seized power following the ouster of President Hosni Mubarak in 2011. Relations rapidly soured with activists when the military violently cracked down on demonstrations and put civilians on military trials. Isolation and speculation But while most celebrated, on the opposite side of town in Cairo's Nasr City where Morsi's supporters had gathered, Islamists were left feeling islolated. The protest was surrounded by the military and main roads were blocked by armed vehicles. Islamist television stations were shut down and MENA, the state news agency, said managers of the Muslim Brotherhood's Misr 25 station were arrested. What role -if any- will the Muslim Brotherhood play in a new government and leadership? Hoisting photos of the president, supporters called the military's move a coup, pledging to defend what they say is his legitimacy as Egypt's first democratically elected president. Many said they feared the oppression they faced under former autocrat Hosni Mubarak would return. As Egyptians remained caught up in strong emotions in the immediate aftermath of the military's intervention, what happens next is open to speculation. Analysts say it is too early to tell whether or not the developments will support Egyptian democracy. "Egypt has thrown a paradox to the world," said Tarek Radwan, associate director for research at the Atlantic Council's Rafik Hariri Center for the Middle East. "On the one hand a military coup is seen as an inherent step backwards for democracy. But on the other hand, what we have seen with Morsi is a backtracking on fundamental rights that would allow a democratic culture to grow." "And you have this huge popular movement that was in support of the military coup. It may in fact put Egypt back on the right path," he said. The road ahead And many say key to putting Egypt on that path is whether or not the Muslim Brotherhood will remain politically involved or be forced back underground like it was for years before the revolution. News of a security crackdown on Muslim Brotherhood leaders, travel bans, and Morsi possibly under house arrest would likely push them not to partake in any transition, even if they were allowed back. "If they are allowed a role, we could likely see them play spoilers, not wanting the transition to succeed," said Radwan. "On the other hand, they can decide not to participate and that would be a whole different kind of spoiler." Apart from the Muslim Brotherhood, others worry of a possibly violent reaction from more conservative Islamist groups. With the past year seen as a test for their ability to partake in the democratic process, many fear they will take the overthrow of a freely elected Islamist president as proof that mainstream politics goes nowhere and will revert to taking up arms. There are concerns about the military's future role "The forceful removal of the nation's first democratically-elected civilian president risks sending a message to Islamists that they have no place in the political order, sowing fears among them that they will suffer yet another bloody crackdown and thus potentially prompting violent, even desperate resistance by Morsi's followers," said the International Crisis Group, an NGO that works on conflict prevention and resolution, in a statement released Wednesday night. And in any attempt to address this threat, many fear the Egyptian security forces will not take human rights into serious consideration. "We can't forget how the Egyptian army handled unrest during the SCAF (Supreme Council of the Armed Forces - the ed.) era and that the police have not been reformed," said Radwan. "Security and human rights are antagonistic to Egyptian security officials, so in this transition to remake democracy, I'm afraid we will see a lot of casualties."


Egypt government promises safe exit for pro-Morsi demonstrators Egypt's military backed government has made a televised appeal to supporters of ousted President Mohammed Morsi. Promising a safe exit from their protest camps, it urged them to rejoin the political process. "Your continued sit-ins have no legal or political use. You have a safe exit, you will be politically integrated," Interior Ministry spokesman Hany Abdel-Latif said in an announcement on state television, Saturday. "If you think you're protecting yourself by staying with your colleagues, we pledge your safe and secure return to normal life as a free and honest citizen," he said. But in response, the alliance led by Morsi's Muslim Brotherhood called further protests for Sunday. It urged "all Egyptians... to continue their peaceful demonstrations and revolution until the ultimate aims are fulfilled." Permalink http://p.dw.com/p/19JIo The Interior Ministry is in charge of security forces. It said it had started taking necessary measures to end the sit-in demonstrations in the area of Rabaa al-Adawiya in eastern Cairo and al-Nahda Square, south of the capital. Thousands of Morsi supporters had gathered in the two camps in the capital demanding the reinstatement of Morsi, who was overthrown by the army a month ago. Latif also told the protestors they were being manipulated: "You are brain-washed, subject to psychological manipulation. You are being used as a political-bargaining chip," he said. Latif claimed many people wanted to leave but faced threats from the protest leaders. Anyone involved in crimes, including torture, killing and kidnapping, would face prosecution, he said. jm/rc (dpa, Reuters, AP)


Egypt presidential candidates spar in first TV debate In a historic first, Egypt's two leading presidential candidates faced off in a nationally televised debate, seeking to profile themselves as the best choice. Each candidate took swipes at the other's political past. Egypt held the first televised presidential debate in the history of the Middle East on Thursday, with the leading liberal and moderate Islamist candidates trading barbs over their respective associations to the Mubarak regime and the Muslim Brotherhood. The four-hour-long debate, broadcast on the private Egyptian channels ONTV and Dream TV, explored a range of topics from the role of Islam and the military in politics to bread and butter issues such as the economy, health care and education. Although there are 13 candidates running for the presidency, the debate pitted Mubarak-era foreign minister Amr Moussa against the moderate Islamist Abdel-Moneim Abolfotoh. Moussa also served as the secretary-general of the Arab League while Abolfotoh, a practicing physician, is a former member of the Muslim Brotherhood. Campaign spin Moussa has billed himself as the candidate capable of restoring order to the post-revolutionary chaos. A secular liberal, he has also tried to appeal to Egyptians who fear the rising power of Islamists. "My point of reference is the nation, your point of reference is the Brotherhood," the 76-year-old Moussa told his rival on stage. Abolfotoh has portrayed himself as the candidate of the revolution, accusing Moussa of being too close to the regime of ousted president Hosni Mubarak. The moderate Islamist has managed to build a coalition of secular liberals, youth estranged from the Brotherhood as well as some followers of the hard-line Salafist movement. "I want to hear one word of opposition you said under Mubarak's regime," 60-year-old Abolfotoh said, pointing out that Moussa supported another term for Mubarak as late as 2010. Historic election With the presidential election set for May 23-24, Egyptians gathered around televisions in Cairo cafes to watch the debate. Abolfotoh is portraying himself as the candidate of the revolution "This is the first time in Egyptian and Arab history," Ahmed Talaat, a 36-year-old accountant, told the Associated Press. "We really are changing. The uprising is bearing fruit." If no clear winner emerges from the May poll, a runoff is to be held from June 16-17. The governing Supreme Council for the Armed Forces (SCAF) has promised to turn over power to an elected civilian government by then and end the volatile post-Mubarak transition. Among the 13 competitors for the presidency, the Muslim Brotherhood's Mohammad Mursi and Mubarak's last prime minister, Ahmed Shafiq, are also seen as frontrunners. slk/pfd (AP, AFP, dpa)


Global Media Forum 2014: How to make the most of the opportunities presented by digital communication Peter Limbourg concluded the 2014 Global Media Forum on a high note saying that, "We should make the most of the opportunities presented by digital communication in order to enact positive change all over the world." The Director General of Deutsche Welle also said that the full potential of the Internet has not yet "even come close to being realized." This idea was exemplified in the approximately 40 panels and workshops featured at this year’s conference, which was held at the World Conference Center in Bonn. The American computer scientist, Vint Cerf, said in a video message that "only one or two percent" of the potential applications that could be supported by the Internet have been fully explored. Emma Ruby-Sachs, who represented the online petition platform Avaaz.org, in a panel discussion said that the Internet could become the "new global superpower." 2,300 guests from 120 countries 2,300 visitors from 120 countries met at the Global Media Forum to discuss issues surrounding the topic of this year’s conference, "From Information to Participation– Challenges for the Media." Peter Limbourg said that the issues presented at the conference, "posed questions that touch the core of our social fabric and affect every single one of us - our values and our freedom." Fear has no future, Egyptian satirist Bassem Youssef said Highlights at the conference included an entertaining and insightful appearance by Egyptian political satirist Bassem Youssef, and a heated debate between Axel Springer CEO Mathias Döpfner and Internet expert Jeff Jarvis. These were also widely carried on social media. For example, the recorded conversation between U.S. journalist Amy Goodman, and Wikileaks activist Sarah Harrison has already been posted on over 300 online platforms. Steinmeier calls for international rules German Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier called for international regulations to achieve a balance between freedom of information, privacy and data security while providing limits on "governmental curiosity." Steinmeier said that these types of regulations "are not far off, but the process must begin today." Speaking at the conference, Gerd Müller, German Federal Minister of Economic Cooperation and Development, expressed his conviction that the digital age will lead to an even larger "global upheaval" than the industrial revolution in the 19th century. Auma Obama: Chance for closer dialogue in Africa In the conference’s closing address, Auma Obama, founder of the "Sauti Kuu"foundation, focused on "education as a human right in the digital world." The Kenyan sociologist and journalist asserted that advancements in digitalization present a "huge chance" for people in Africa to engage in a dialogue as equals. Concerning the responsibility of the media, Obama said, "Don’t give us a fish, don’t teach us to fish, ask us if we eat fish." Frank-Walter Steinmeier spoke about the power of brutal imagery Topic 2015: Media and Foreign Policy Director General Limbourg concluded the Global Media Forum saying that – just as in private and public life - international relations have been increasingly influenced by digital media. The tense relationship between media and foreign policy in the digital age will be the topic of the next Global Media Forum to be held from June 22 - 24, 2015. The Director General thanked all of the Global Media Forum partners who contributed to the success of the conference with their speeches, workshops and presentations. "The Global Media Forum would not have been possible without the support of our co-host, the Foundation for International Dialogue of the Sparkasse savings bank in Bonn, the German Fopreign Ministry, the German Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperation and Development and the City of Bonn. I would like to express my heartfelt thanks to these institutions."


Gerd Müller: "A powerful tool for more opportunity, freedom and progress" German Development Minister Gerd Müller discusses the close link between education and participation, calling access to online technologies key to promoting democratic principles. Bonn, Germany - At Deutsche Welle's international media congress in Bonn, German Development Minister Gerd Müller said better advantage should be taken of the participatory and educational opportunities available in today’s digital world, especially in developing countries. His speech addressed the main theme of this year's Global Media Forum, "From Information to Participation - Challenges for the Media", taking place through July 2 at the World Conference Center Bonn (WCCB). "The digital era is causing even more radical change than the Industrial Revolution," said Müller. "Information travels around the world within seconds capable of both triggering revolutions, as well as simply providing practical support in everyday life. We haven't yet fully recognized the effect and impact this has on our lives." The German politician added that the digital age is also transforming the media sector, particularly in developing countries. "People in many parts of the world are still being denied their fundamental right to information. The Internet thwarts censorship and facilitates participation in society. These are opportunities that should be seized." Development Minister Müller told the audience of his recent trip to Nigeria, where he visited a girls' school in mid-June. "The terror being spread by Boko Haram in the north is so far-reaching that even the girls at this school in the south live in fear of the terrorists who violently oppose education and Westernization," Müller told Deutsche Welle. "Nonetheless, the students made it clear that their most fervent wish was for computers. Despite all adversity, they want to take part in this interconnected world." The example makes clear that education and participation are inextricably linked. Müller is convinced that, "the global electronic network can be a powerful tool for increasing opportunity, freedom and progress." It is appropriate that the conference is addressing these related issues now, he added, because "for many people, especially in developing countries, access to communication technologies is the key to democratic participation in political decision-making processes." Müller noted that this is also the aim of his ministry's online campaign to formulate a charter for the future. Called "ONE WORLD - Our Responsibility," it seeks to involve all elements of society - social organizations, the private business sector, academia and policy-makers - to establish a new global set of goals with which "we all take joint responsibility for our future and for the outlook of future generations." From information to participation Germany's Development Minister Gerd Müller spoke today at the 2014 Global Media Forum, an annual three-day conference hosted by the Deutsche Welle, this year for the seventh time. Its 40 separate events concern topics related to the opportunities and risks posed by the digital world and their impacts on people's lives. Other guest speakers at the conference are author and Internet visionary Jeff Jarvis and CEO of Axel Springer SE Mathias Döpfner, German Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier, Egyptian political satirist Bassem Youssef, Internet activist Emma Ruby-Sachs and WikiLeaks journalist Sarah Harrison. International partners and co-hosts The 2014 Global Media Forum is held in cooperation with many national and international partners, such as Amnesty International, Deutsche Telekom, the Grimme-Institut, NATO, the United Nations, the Vodafone Institute for Society and Communications and Voices of Africa. The conference is co-hosted by the Foundation for International Dialogue of the Sparkasse Savings Bank in Bonn. Support is also kindly provided by Germany's Federal Foreign Office, the Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperation and Development and the City of Bonn. Cooperation partner is The Right Livelihood College Campus Bonn.


Egypt swings again as German group plays Cairo Jazz Festival Cairo, always a cultural center, is now a political one too. But the city's vibrant arts scene is revamping itself, with the help of the Cairo Jazz Festival - and an unusual German band. For musicians, the most important thing in the world is making music - that's the message that Angelika Niescier, conductor of the German Women's Jazz Orchestra, would like to convey. "When you feel that urge, then you have to keep playing, and keep learning," said Niescier, punctuating her point with hand gestures. Niecscier is passionate and animated, and when she talks about music, she uses her whole body to do it. She laughs out loud; she jokes around; she makes faces of surprise or contemplation. Then, she stands up on stage and pours every ounce of emotion into her saxophone-playing, thrilling the audience. Her playing tells stories - of envy, suffering, passion, anger and joy, with her entire body swinging and twitching to the music. A big weekend for Egyptians Niescier, a composer and conductor from Cologne, recently took her 12-woman orchestra to Egypt. They first gave a concert at Alexandria's modern library and cultural center, the Bibliotheca Alexandrina. Then, they were one of 13 groups to perform at the three-day Cairo Jazz Festival, which ran this year from March 17-19. The festival is now in its third year. The 12-woman group is strictly professional Understandably, Cairo has shown little of its famous cultural side since the revolution in late January that led to the February ouster of authoritarian Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak. The Jazz Festival was one of the first major cultural events scheduled in the capital since the revolution, and it took place on an important weekend: on Saturday, March 19, Egyptians were asked to vote on a referendum over changes to their constitution - the first free election in decades. "The [festival] attendance was positively surprising; more people came every day," said Amro Salah, director of the Jazz Festival. With nearly 3,000 tickets sold, people from a wide array of cultural backgrounds came to hear performances. "It is an enormous success for us, because it tells us that we've gained the trust of a lot of people in the past three years." It is not only the international bands that attract a wider audience to the festival, however. Educational programs and workshops, organized by the Egyptian Jazz Society, are also popular. "It's not about politics; it's about life" Despite its reputation as the region's cultural mecca, culture and politics used to rarely cross paths in Cairo - until January 25 of this year when protests erupted throughout Egypt. "It was always better not to get politically involved," said Egyptian singer Noha Fikry. "Everything always stayed the same anyway, and there was little hope for any change." But then the revolution politicized the entire nation. What once seemed impossible, has now become reality: Everyone, everywhere, is talking politics, and the Jazz Festival was no exception. For example, Fikry told the people attending her concert that they should go out and vote at the referendum, and utilize this new right. "It's not even about politics. It's about our lives," she said. Anti-government protesters during Friday prayers in Cairo on Feb. 11 Red for revolution Foreign peformers who came to the festival were also "thrilled at how the Egyptian youth fought for freedom," Salah said. "They felt incredibly inspired." For Niescier, the chance to be in Egypt at such a time made her grateful. "It's an unbelievable experience to be in this country so soon afer such a historic moment," she said, and at the same time, she praised the organizers for going through with their festival plans despite the political upheaval. Niescier had arranged a piece for the band's performances in Alexandria and Cairo, and dedicated it to the revolution and the Egyptian people. "You have to honor a moment like that, " she said. The piece, called Red - "for the color of revolution" - was the last one she and the 12-piece orchestra played on Friday evening, and it got a standing ovation. "I hope the new regime will be more open, and will be open to music and art projects, without prejudice," Niescier said, adding that in post-revolution Egypt, she expects people to have less patience for government censorship than ever before. Author: Amira El Ahl / jen Editor: Louisa Schaefer


Brotherhood trials raise fears of fresh violence Egypt's Muslim Brotherhood is facing a wave of trials. Although courts have dismissed charges against many protesters, the country fears yet more violence when the main trials against the Islamists began on Monday. A lower Egyptian court in Cairo, over the weekend, acquitted 155 Islamist protesters, according to state media on Sunday (08.12.13). At the same time, an appeals court in Alexandria ordered the release of 21 female Islamist protesters, including 14 women previously sentenced to 11 years in jail. But the mood remains tense across the country as Egypt's Muslim Brotherhood braces for the largest wave of court cases in its 85-year history. The trials began on Monday (09.12.13), with more than 2,000 prisoners, dozens of accused, and allegations that range from corruption, to instigating murder and committing treason. One month ago, a Cairo court ordered the Islamist organization to be dissolved and now the government is taking on the former leadership of the group. On October 29, the head of the organization, Mohammed Badie, chief strategist Khairat el-Shater, as well as several others, appeared in court. Former President Mohammed Morsi, faces several trials, with one that began on November 4. Technically, the trials against the Brotherhood kicked off back in August, but were postponed until the end of October. Information on the proceedings against Morsi is sparse though. Human rights lawyer Ahmed Usman from Cairo told DW that "until now, no one is allowed to meet with Morsi, not even his lawyers. In the case of (his predecessor) Hosni Mubarak, the defense team could prepare with the defendant. In the case of Morsi though there's no contact." The ousted president is bein held by the army at an undisclosed location. A whole host of trials Morsi is being held at a secret location waiting for his trials to begin The list of accusations against the leading figures of the Brotherhood is long. Morsi allegedly broke out of a prison near Cairo during the 2011 revolution. He's also accused of having plotted together with Hamas against Egypt. The first trial will most likely focus on the claims that during the mass protests in December 2012, Morsi ordered violence against the protesters. Many of the other members of the Muslim Brotherhood are also accused of instigating violence and the possession of weapons without license. Observers expect at least a dozen court cases and hundreds of defendants - many of whom could - if found guilty - face the death penalty. Many Egyptians fear that the trials might spark fresh violent riots between Morsi supporters and the police. But political scientist Hassan Abu Taleb of the Al-Ahram Research Center thinks it's right to stick with the trials. "Should the government decide to halt such court cases, it would mean that the blackmailing by the Muslim Brotherhood would have been successful. It would be a clear sign that the government is very weak." Political show trials? Supporters of the Muslim Brotherhood though are warning of political show trials - a concern shared by many human rights activists in the country. They not only criticize the accusations that portray the organization as an international terror group, but also point out that there's not enough legal aid given to the defendants. A lawyer who was supposed to defend Morsi fled the country after receiving threats. Several lawyers close to the Brotherhood are also in jail. As a result many of the prominent defendants are refusing to cooperate during questioning. According to Egyptian officials, Morsi insists he still is the rightful president of the country and refuses to respond to the allegations brought against him. There are more Brotherhood members on trial than there were in the trials against the Mubarak regime and the accusations are more serious. Observers see this as an indication that the trials are first and foremost serving a political goal: Lawyer Usman sees them as a continuation of the power struggle between Islamists and the military. "To a large degree the trials are about revenge. It's about one group that wants to get into power and a second group that's trying to destroy them." Many Egyptians fear the trials could trigger fresh waves of violence Calls for transitional justice Usman also criticizes the lack of transparency in the judiciary. So far it's not even known where the trials will be held, whether journalists or observers will be allowed in and it's unclear whether the trials will be broadcast. Opponents and supporters of the Brotherhood alike agree that the trials will not contribute to the process of reconciliation. Activists are pushing for a period of transitional justice instead, hoping that this could help toward an independent investigation of both the crimes during the Mubarak and the Morsi regimes. Hassan Abu Taleb, one of the supporters of the concept, says that "a commission should be responsible for coming up with and passing a special law. It could lay out the steps to get a process of reconciliation going."


Military reshuffle follows Sinai attack On the orders of President Mohammed Morsi, Egypt's spy chief and the governor of an area that saw 16 soldiers killed over the weekend have been sacked. This comes as Egypt launched raids in Sinai in retaliation. A spokesman said on state television that Morsi had ordered national intelligence chief Murad Muwafi to retire on Wednesday. The governor of North Sinai, Abdel Wahab Mabruk, received the same order. Egypt launched a retaliatory attack on Tuesday aimed at Islamist militants suspected of carrying out the attack against the soldiers. By Wednesday, the military had claimed success. "Elements from the armed forces and interior ministry supported by the air force began a plan to restore security by pursuing and targeting armed terrorist elements in Sinai, and it has accomplished this task with complete success," the military said in a statement. At least 20 suspected militants have been killed. Border tensions rising The Egyptian government blamed Sunday's ambush on Palestinian Islamist militants. Cairo indefinitely closed the Rafah border crossing with the Gaza Strip in response. Gaza is controlled by the Islamist group Hamas. There has been growing concern about security along the border since Egypt's formerly US-backed President Hosni Mubarak was ousted in 2011. Lawlessness has been on the rise in the Sinai Peninsula, and the Middle East News Agency reports that one checkpoint has been targeted 28 times since the Egyptian revolution began. Morsi is a member of the Islamist Muslim Brotherhood, which is more supportive of the Palestinians and openly critical of Israel than the former Mubarak regime. Morsi has promised to respect all of Cairo's international agreements, which would include Egypt's 1979 peace treaty with the Jewish State. But other members of the Muslim Brotherhood have called the treaty into question, raising concern that one of the Middle East's former anchors of stability could be weakened. Mubarak's Egypt was often a lead negotiator brokering talks between Israelis and Palestinians. slk,mz/msh (Reuters, AFP, dpa)


New terror threat emerges in Egypt So far this year, a car bomb gutted the Cairo police headquarters, a military helicopter was shot down, a high-level security official was assassinated, and a tourist bus was bombed near Egypt's Sinai Peninsula. The attacks have all been claimed by Ansar Beit al-Maqdis, a shadowy militant group based in the Sinai Peninsula that has emerged as one of the biggest terrorist threats to the country in decades.  "When you look at the training, the weapons and the technology they have, it's much more sophisticated now than ever before," said Ihab Youssef, a former police officer who served more than 20 years in the Ministry of Interior and founded Risk Free Egypt, a risk management firm in Cairo. "From my point of view, we still have a lot to see. It's not going to end soon."  On Monday, a Cairo court officially declared Ansar Beit al-Maqdis a terrorist organization. Earlier this month, both the United States and the United Kingdom placed the group on terror lists.  Ansar Beit al-Maqdis, or Champions of Jerusalem, first emerged amid a security vacuum following the 2011 Egyptian revolution. During this time, prison amnesties also led to the release of many militants who had been imprisoned under former autocrat Hosni Mubarak.  "A lot of jihadists from the 1980s and 1990s went back to the Sinai and started training and collecting weapons, especially weapons from the Libyan war," said Aaron Y. Zelin, a fellow at the Washington Institute for Near East Policy. "They had the space to organize and build up strength." Out of the shadows The group initially focused their attacks on Israel, but following the military overthrow of former Islamist president Mohamed Morsi last July, they turned their weapons against the state. The group has turned its attention to Egyptian targets With the exception of the February attack on a tourist bus in the border town of Taba that killed three South Korean tourists, the majority of Ansar Beit al-Maqdis' targets have been army and security forces. The group has said it wants revenge for the military-backed government's violent suppression of Islamists and for the army's military campaign in Sinai against the insurgency.  In a statement released by Ansar Beit al-Maqdis last December, the militants warned police and security officials to leave their positions if they were to avoid attack and accused the military of being non-Muslim because it was fighting against those seeking to impose Sharia law.  "We are the most resolute and determined to carry out the command of Allah and his messenger to do jihad against you and fight you until all the religion is for Allah," the group said in the statement.  But while Ansar Beit al-Maqdis has been open in claiming its attacks, much remains unknown about the group itself. There is very little information on its origins, funding and recruitment strategy. Al Qaeda link? Despite having yet to reveal a pledge of allegiance, statements and videos from the group are released through jihadi forums from al-Fajr Media Center, a key distributor of al Qaeda propaganda online. Ansar Beit al-Maqdis video clips also frequently feature figures like Egyptian born al Qaeda leader Ayman al Zawahiri.  While many have pointed to the group's links to al Qaeda, the government has alleged links between Ansar Beit al-Maqdis and the Muslim Brotherhood despite little evidence to support this claim.  Following a car bomb at the police headquarters in Mansoura on December 24 that left 16 dead, the Brotherhood denied any involvement and condemned the bombing. Shortly thereafter, Ansar Beit al-Maqdis released a statement claiming the attacks. The government instead blamed the Brotherhood and declared them a terrorist organization.  By lumping together Ansar Beit al-Maqdis and the Muslim Brotherhood, experts say the government not only hardens opinions abroad of an authoritarian regime, but it also risks further radicalization. Brothers-in-arms?  "By insisting the Brotherhood is linked to Ansar Beit al-Maqdis, the regime may inadvertently be pushing some Brotherhood cadres, in particular those already promoting small-scale violence, into the waiting arms of Ansar Beit al-Maqdis," said David Barnett, a research associate at the Foundation for Defense of Democracies in Washington. Experts say the government's heavy-handed approach has helped extremist groups What exactly the terrorist designation will mean for Egypt's efforts against the group is unclear. Army officials have said their approach to fighting the group will not change, but suggested punishments for militants could become harsher.  "How exactly Ansar Beit al-Maqdis will respond, if at all, to the designation remains to be seen," said Barnett.  Beyond the attempt to link the Brotherhood to the attacks, others say the government's heavy-handed response to extremists could be doing more harm than good.  In North Sinai, where grievances with the government are long-standing, security forces have used scorched-earth tactics, burned and shelled homes, destroyed huts used for livestock, confiscated laptops and other possessions, and made mass arrests in the fight against terrorism.  Innocent civilians with no connection to militants as well as children have been caught up in the operation and while recent weeks have seen significant arrests and a notable decrease in attacks, others say the brutal tactics could be hardening those in the restive Sinai region and driving more to terrorism.  "They are essentially just bombing anything that is in sight, they aren't very discriminating in who they target, and you see entire neighborhoods and houses being leveled," said Zelin. "They definitely suppressed them, but at what cost?"


Syrian sniper says rebels must fight Said Mermet joined the rebels when his nephew was killed by the Syrian army. He insists it's not revenge that motivates him, but the love of his country. Said Mermet never planned on becoming a rebel in the Free Syrian Army. When the revolution started in March 2011, Mermet wanted to join in the protests. As his mother's only son, though, he felt obliged to stay out of harm's way in order to take care of her. Then, the Syrian military killed his nephew; he joined the Free Syrian Army that same day, on August 18, 2012. "It was not revenge," Mermet says. "My nephew was my friend. We were the same age. I didn't want to take revenge; I wanted to complete his work of fighting for a free Syria. I wanted to help the Syrian people." Born in Azaz, Syria, to a Turkish father and an Egyptian mother, Mermet considers himself a Syrian patriot. He had 15 days of military training with the Free Syrian Army and was then sent to Aleppo to be a sniper. Becoming a sniper The 31-year-old claims to have killed at least three people. He may have killed more people but as a sniper he has to move from location to location after firing each shot. "It was very difficult the first time, but we know that if we don't kill them, they will kill us," explains Mermet. "Anyway, it is very difficult, whether they are Syrian or not. To kill a human being is very difficult but we have to do it." After a few months in Aleppo, he was transferred to fight in rural areas near Minnagh Airport. A few months later, he was transferred to work as a border guard at the Bab al Salameh border crossing along the Syrian-Turkish border. He has been living and working here as a border guard for about six months. When asked if he likes his job, he replies, "I like Syria." Mermet, who has an eighth-grade education, lives in the Bab al Salameh Internally Displaced Persons camp, just a short walk from the border. He lives alongside about 10,000 Syrians seeking refuge from the conflict in their hometowns. Mermet and his wife share a three-meter by three-meter (10-feet by 10-feet) tent. His family's home in Azaz was destroyed and his mother has since died. Mermet felt he had to take action when his nephew was killed The revolution has altered Mermet's life dramatically. "Of course, it is not easy. It is a big change," he says. He says he'll fight until Syrian President Bashar al Assad is gone. He calls on the West to support the Free Syrian Army. "Of course, we don't expect them to fight for us. We are responsible for our country, we can defend our country, we can end the regime," he adds. But, like rebel military and political leaders, Mermet says the rebel fighters need anti-aircraft and anti-tank weapons. "Kalashnikovs, sniper weapons and other small weapons can do nothing," he says. "We need [the West] to support us and we will do the rest. We will finish Bashar al Assad." Defending Syria Mermet insists the Free Syrian Army soldiers are not terrorists. He says they just want to defend themselves and the Syrian people. As for the small bands of foreign radical militants coming from places like Iraq and Libya, Mermet says they should go home once the regime falls. But if they don't leave, the Free Syrian Army will fight them, too. Once the war is finally over, Mermet simply wants to go home to resume his job repairing computers. "We will put the weapons aside. We will go back to our jobs. Everyone will go back to his shop," he says. "We don't want to be soldiers."


Egypt political factions condemn violence, urge dialogue Egypt's rival political factions have uniformly condemned the violence that has killed dozens over the past week. The groups pledged their support for a national dialogue to resolve the country's political crisis. Egypt's top Muslim scholar, Grand Imam Ahmed al-Tayyeb, chaired talks between the factions Thursday at the headquarters of Al-Azhar University in Cairo, Sunni Islam's highest seat of learning. Present at the talks were liberal opposition heads, Islamists, youth groups, independents and church members. They signed an Al-Azhar document vowing to support "a serious dialogue" and "condemn all forms of violence and incitement to violence," stressing "the responsibility of the state and its security apparatus to protect citizens." The talks come at an important time for an increasingly polarized Egypt. Last week's unrest, which coincided with the second anniversary of the revolution that toppled longtime dictator Hosni Mubarak, erupted in response to President Mohammed Morsi's ever-increasing power. The ensuing violence left 56 dead. In the days that followed, the situation worsened in Port Said, after a court had sentenced 21 residents of the canal city to death for their role in the Port Said Stadium disaster. By Tuesday, the country's army chief said that the ongoing street battles could bring about the collapse of the state. The opposition has demanded that President Mohammed Morsi establish a nationally unified government and rewrite controversial parts of Egypt's recently-passed and Islamist-backed constitution. Al-Tayyeb, who heads the thousand-year-old university, told politicians that a national dialogue, "in which all elements of Egyptian society participate, without any exclusion, is the only tool to resolve any problems or differences." "Political work has nothing to do with violence or sabotage and the welfare of everyone and the fate of our nation depends on respect for the rule of law," he said. Al-Azhar tends to remain above the political fray in Egypt, and is one of the few institutions seen as neutral in the politically charged country. Opposition, Brotherhood weigh in "We come out of these talks with some sort of optimism" despite "the difficult challenges ahead," said former UN nuclear watchdog chief and leader of the opposition National Salvation Front, Mohamed ElBaradei (above right). "We will do whatever we can with goodwill to build the trust of the Egyptian people," he told reporters. Saad el-Katatni (pictured above speaking), head of President Mohammed Morsi's Freedom and Justice Party – the political arm of the Muslim Brotherhood – called it "an historic day." "Everyone in the meeting expressed readiness to make concessions to make this experiment succeed," he said. Speaking from Berlin Wednesday on a trip to promote foreign investment in Egypt, Morsi skirted around calls for a unity government, saying the decision would have to wait until after parliamentary elections due in April. dr/kms (Reuters, AFP, AP)


Opinion: Undesired outcome emerges in Egypt An Islamist and a former member of the Mubarak regime placed well in the first round of presidential elections in Egypt. The result has split the country into two camps, writes DW's Rainer Sollich. Even though the final results are not yet in, the losers of Egypt's first free presidential election have already been decided. The young, liberal activists who with admirable courage threw out Hosni Mubarak more than a year ago. Rainer Sollich The so-called Facebook revolutionaries fought for 15 months for more justice, democracy and a modern civil society - all of which represented radical changes for their country. The entire world, and we Europeans in particular, watched and lent our sympathy to the revolution against Mubarak's regime of despots. We were reminded of the historic changes that many of us witnessed in Central and Eastern Europe. But the overwhelming victory by the Muslim Brotherhood and Salafists in last winter's parliamentary elections changed euphoria into disillusionment and made clear that the majority of the Egyptian people had other priorities at the time. People were looking for security and stability. They needed jobs and economic prospects. And whether we like it or not, many of them wanted Islam to have greater influence in Egypt.  At the same time, a similarly sized part of the population was willing to accept the undemocratic influence of the army and former Mubarak loyalists if it meant preventing Islamists from gaining too much power. The country was split in two camps. An undesirable result The victory of Mohammed Morsi, a candidate closely linked to the Muslim Brotherhood, in the first round of presidential voting is clearly not the result that we Europeans would have wished for. Members of the Muslim Brotherhood are certainly not naive fanatics. They are deeply rooted in Egyptian society, and their social work and decades of opposition to the Mubarak regime have lent them a great deal of recognition. They connect hard-liners as well as several moderate and pragmatic powers. Still, the party's understanding of democracy, freedom of religion and the role of women in society are causes for concern. On the other hand, there is also reason for uneasiness about the ringing endorsement for former Mubarak ally Ahmed Shafiq. He would be a near guarantee that Egypt does not become a state ruled by Sharia law. But he is a representative of the old system - and many liberal Egyptians regard him as a counter-revolutionary. The runoff in June could end up posing a seminal choice between Islamists and supporters of the old Mubarak system. Revolutionaries not obsolete There are also positive remarks to be made: Egyptians used the mainly peaceful election to prove that they are "mature enough" for democracy, a fact Mubarak repeatedly professed was not the case. Now it will be up to Egyptians to push forward the reforms that have recently stumbled along the path to enactment. Military leaders have to surrender their power rather than pulling the strings from behind the scenes, and Islamic powers cannot be given the opportunity to do away with hard-won freedoms. What Egypt needs are political watchdogs, including a free, courageous press and loyal opposition - even outside of parliament and the president's office. The first batch of revolutionaries may seem to have had their power stripped away of them in Egypt's democratically elected institutions, but they will continue to be needed in the future. Author: Rainer Sollich / sms Editor: Greg Wiser


Independence: wishful thinking for Arab media? The Arab Spring brought with it many freedoms to the region's media. But now, many media outlets are feeling renewed pressure from both the old and new political elites. More than 30 journalists have been killed in Syria. Editors-in-chief get kicked out of Egyptian government papers. Tighter media policies are in effect in Tunisia. And there is increased competition between broadcasters from Iran and the Gulf States. As different as these examples might be, they do point to a general trend in the Arab media landscape since the beginning of the Arab Spring revolts: newspapers, TV and Internet are increasingly coming under government control again – or at least under government observation. The media in the Arab world are currently going through a complicated and often contradictory development, Soazig Dollnet, Middle East specialist at Reporters without Borders, told DW. At the beginning of the revolutions, press freedoms took a big leap in many of the countries. But then the development came to a halt and "in many countries there are now concerns over a backlash. So there are no grounds for talking about a victory for press freedom," Dollnet said. The media's influence Broadcasters like Al Arabiya or Al Jazeera are hugely influential The reason behind the repressive stance many governments are now taking toward the media is its role during the revolutions. Television, newspapers and the Internet demonstrated to what extent they could influence political developments. The most telling example was Egypt. The success of the revolution against Hosni Mubarak was closely linked to the reporting of Qatar-based broadcaster Al Jazeera. The network reported, as some pro-government forces criticized, mostly from the perspective of the protesters and adopted their positions. Certainly, Mubarak perceived it that way and only a few days after the beginning of the protests, banned the reception of Al Jazeera. Now, in Syria, the – Arab and Western – media are playing a significant role. With foreign sympathies clearly favoring the rebels, the Assad regime internationally has little chance of presenting its view of the situation. Government pressure In light of these experiences, many governments in the Middle East now try in part to control the national media. In Tunesia, a new law to protect the media is being implemented only hesitantly, said Dollet. She explained that Reporters without Borders was concerned about the influence that the Islamic Ennahda party had on the new staffing of public radio and TV or newspapers. She also is concerned about developments in Egypt. While Mubarak is no longer in power, parts of his old regime are still in place. And the change of editors-in-chief that new President Morsi had ordered, suggest to Dollet that the new government seeks to continue with government control of the media. Morsi has changed the editors in chief at state media outlets Lawrence Pintak, a former CBS Middle East correspondent and now with Washington State University, is equally concerned about the current developments in Egypt. He believes there's a great danger to the freedom of the Egyptian media, he told DW. The government media was once again forced to be an instrument of the regime, albeit a different regime, Pintak explained. And like Dollet, he is skeptical about future developments. "The independent media have taken one step forward and two steps backward on several occasions. There is now a more lively media scene, including some influential TV channels, but these are still under pressure from the government." "Media war" Al Jazeera is one of the region's most influential TV broadcasters This pressure also persists on the Arabian peninsula. But Pintak detects some changes there; for instance in Saudi Arabia, where the media are going through slow changes. Pintak explained that the grip on the Saudi media has been somewhat loosened but that there still are a number of red lines that everyone is aware of. And while some parts of the media are rather liberal, others have to be more in line with the conservative elements of society. Dollet believes that Gulf state media, like Al Jazeera or Al Arabiya, will increasingly compete with Iranian broadcasters. She expects a media war over which will be the most influential outlet in the region. "The most contested battlefield in this war will be in the audiovisual media. The weapons," she says, "will be information, misinformation and very biased reporting."


'You can't turn Egypt into a democracy overnight' Europeans can do little to help end violence in Egypt, says political analyst Jan Techau. But Mohammed Morsi will not want to create facts on the ground that would make a partnership with the EU impossible. Deutsche Welle: After Mohammed Morsi declared a state of emergency, the Egyptian cabinet passed a law giving the army the right to arrest civilians and assist the police in providing security. Just how concerned is the EU that President Morsi could crack down on the opposition even more? Jan Techau: I think there's huge concern on behalf of the Europeans that this entire transition process can get out of hand and go in a distinctively wrong direction. There are lots of indicators that this may already be the case. But here in Brussels, the focus is on balance-thinking. Obviously the situation is not ideal, and obviously many people are greatly disappointed in Mohammed Morsi and in the way he's conducted affairs. On the other hand, people here are quite realistic that you can't turn Egypt into a democracy overnight - after so many years of autocratic rule. So people are willing to cut the Egyptians some slack.  They also understand the value of order that needs to be restored. But they're watching the situation very keenly in a very concerned way. Publicly, there is little reaction from the Europeans, however. Catherine Ashton's spokesperson said the EU's High Representative condemned the violence and that she expressed her condolences to the families of the victims. She also urged the Egyptian authorities to restore calm and order. Will the EU sit back and watch, or will they get involved? As always, it's hybrid business here in Brussels. There's constant talk about it - in the European institutions, at the External Action Service and on an ambassadorial level. They are all getting the latest intelligence and are trying to make sense of the situation. Then there are talks in the member states in the national capitals, primarily in the three big ones - London, Paris, Berlin - but also on the southern flank of the European Union, which is especially involved. They have their own assessment and their own ideas. The magic trick in foreign policy is to somehow achieve a coordinated assessment of the situation. That's pretty difficult. A key role is played by the EU delegation, which is now an embassy really, that reports from Egypt and delivers an independent assessment of what's happening. All of this is currently being looked at. But the situation in Egypt is volatile and in flux. It's been difficult to exercise influence over Egypt after the end of Mubarak, and it's getting even more difficult now. Dozens of people have already been killed. So what needs to happen in order for the EU to get involved? Jan Techau is the Director of think-tank Carnegie Europe The question is: What do you mean by involvement? The way the EU and the Europeans per se can influence the situation on the ground is very limited. One of the hallmarks of this revolutionary movement that brought Mohammed Morsi to power is that the people want their own decisions. They don't have an interest in getting outside powers involved very deeply. They're interested in trade; they're interested in development in the widest sense. Investment and agreements of that kind have been made between the Egyptians and the EU just recently. But the political influence you can have on the ground is very limited. Obviously, there's no military option. In a situation of crisis, in particular, where the news is coming out on a minute by minute basis, it's very difficult to exercise a calming influence. In the end, Mohammed Morsi needs to manage the crisis in a way that leaves the door open to afterwards still talk to the Europeans, and not create facts on the ground that make him an impossible partner. I think the ball is very much in his court at the moment. Isn't the ball in the court of the opposition? Mohammed Morsi invited the opposition to join crisis talks later on Monday, but they rejected his invitation. I think the ball is mostly in Mohammed Morsi's court. The key in the kind of offer that Mohammed Morsi made is that he means it. It's important that he actually gives a real opening to these forces and does not just create some kind of a fig leaf, some kind of a token meeting that in the end is only there to calm down the masses. Mohammed Morsi has not fully understood that the political situation in Egypt has changed in a way that you can't just restore autocratic rule under a different label, under the Muslim Brotherhood label. The situation has changed because of the revolution. More inclusion is needed. All kinds of people now have a voice. All of these people have to have a say. You will not get social peace in Egypt if you still think that you can talk to the people and it doesn't mean anything. This is the kind of learning curve that Mohammed Morsi is experiencing at the moment. The question is: How flexible can he be? Does he have it in himself to embrace the situation? Will his political allies let him? Ultimately only the Egyptians can answer these questions. Not us. Is there anything at all that Western powers, the EU and the US, have as an asset that could influence Mohammed Morsi's efforts to end the violence in his own country? Their influence is limited. The Europeans have a big economic force behind them. They have trade issues that the Egyptians are extremely interested in. The Europeans are also very strong at tourism and other factors, which the Egyptians bitterly need. That gives the Europeans some leverage. But that's more long-term political leverage than it is immediate crisis management leverage. I don't think that any European leader can have much of an influence at this point. Nobody can pick up the phone and tell Mohammed Morsi how to do it. I think we can only take a long-term perspective. That is the trickiness of the issue: 95 percent of foreign policy consists of managing of things that happen on a daily basis. Only 5 percent is long-term. That's why much of the long-term outcome depends on crisis situations like this. So the immediate influence is very limited. The same goes for the Americans, who have a very strong military cooperation with Egypt. There, it's even more difficult to exercise influence because the role of the military in all of this is reduced. Mohammed Morsi is less dependent on them than Egypt's previous rulers were. He has his own mandate. So my feeling is that the Americans - just like the Europeans - are hoping that this crisis can get resolved in a somewhat decent way. And then, they hope, the more long-term political process can start again, in which we have a stronger influence and can play out the cards that we have. How significant is Egypt's and Mohammed Morsi's development, or evolution, in terms of the relationship between the West and an entire region? Egypt is the cradle of the Muslim Brotherhood, after all. I think the eminence of Mohammed Morsi's position doesn't only come from the fact that Egypt is the cradle of the Muslim Brotherhood. When you look at the political nature of the Muslim Brotherhood around the Arab World, they're significantly different in all of the various countries that have had these revolutions. They're all very much local actors. There's not really a pan-Muslim Brotherhood ideology that they'd be strictly vetted to - even though it looks convenient for us to believe that. The real eminence, the real reason why it's important is that Egypt has traditionally been the culturally and economically leading country in the region. It's the country which sets the pace, if you will. It has a blueprint function for other democratic societies. That's the responsibility that Morsi has. It's interesting how he's sending out mixed signals. On the one hand, he's very difficult on the domestic front, and Egyptians are not happy with the way he's handling it. On the other hand, he's kept some kind of cold peace with Israel, and he's done so in a rather skillful way. The treaty with Israel and Egypt stands. That plays a huge role in the entire region. It is of very high political and symbolic value that the Muslim Brotherhood, the new government in Egypt, is following the letters of that treaty. It's not warm love, but it's certainly better than the opposite, which would be some kind of armed conflict. I think the foreign policy agenda of Mohammed Morsi has overall been a lot more satisfactory to Western observers than his domestic scheme. But in the end, the two need to match. And so far, we're not seeing much of that. What's your assessment: How likely is it that the opposition will get what they want, i.e. amendments to the constitution with an Islamist hue which was passed in December in a referendum? I really don't know how the political forces will play out over the next few weeks or days and how strong they are in the end. Mohammed Morsi will need huge political leadership skills to first of all understand what's going on and secondly get the opposition in and accommodate them. He also has to keep his own power base and have an eye on the wider foreign policy scheme. It's impossible at this point to say who's going to prevail. The only fair assumption is that if the opposition don't get their way at least partly, we will see protracted turmoil in Egypt. The genie is out of the bottle after the revolution. The Egyptians are not easily treated like children any more. So the government needs a formula that makes people happy – and that's a very difficult task. Jan Techau is the Director of Carnegie Europe, the European center of the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, a Brussels-based think tank. Interview: Nina Haase


A search for identity in Egypt's street fights Egypt has seen a rise in fights between Copts and Muslims. But the conflicts involve more than a mere sense of religious rivalry. Other questions that go well beyond religious identity are at stake. A cross adorns a building at Al-Azhar University, one of the largest and most significant religious institutions in the Islamic world. A couple of Coptic adolescents sprayed the symbol there, apparently motivated by religious fighting in the province of Qalyubia, north of Cairo. Egypt's Copts and Muslims attacked each other there recently, leading to the deaths of four Copts and one Muslim. In turn, the cross has provoked several still unknown individuals - likely Islamists - to the extent that they attacked visitors of the funeral services held for the murdered Copts in Cairo's Saint Mark's Cathedral over the weekend. They threw rocks and Molotov cocktails at the attendees, who defended themselves and shouted slogans decrying the ruling Muslim Brothers and President Mohammed Morsi. Tensions escalated, and soon both groups were engaged in heated street fighting. The situation did not ease until Sunday. Following the violence - a Muslim house in Khosous, north of Cairo Forced politicization The conflicts demonstrate how much ill will exists between Copts and Muslims - at least between radical representatives of both groups. But political scientist Gamal Soltan of the American University in Cairo said the character of that tension has changed. While there has long been a rivalry between the two groups, it was based largely on religious differences, he said, adding that now Egypt's religious and political identity as a whole is at stake. For months, Egypt has been wrangling with questions about the role of religion in state affairs. A deep divide now separates those who support a state based upon a religious foundation, and those who prefer secularism. "The Coptic community finds itself deeply implicated in this conflict because it's about the identity of the nation," Soltan said, going on to say that Copts "sympathize more with the secular opposition" even though the Coptic Church tends to refrain from addressing political questions. Soltan said he believes these sympathies have contributed to the recent tensions between Copts and the Muslim Brothers. "The current turmoil in Egypt forces the Copts to take sides in the current political crisis in the country - something the Coptic community tried to avoid for decades." Coptic Pope Tawadros II of Alexandria opposes a religious state Words spoken recently by Coptic Pope Tawadros leave no doubt that the recent conflicts between Copts and Muslims are taking place against a background of fundamental questions of Egypt's identity. "Egypt was always a secular state," he said after the incidents over the weekend. "Religion has its own forums. The intention of transforming Egypt into a non-secular state is something we absolutely and resolutely reject." Heated atmosphere Morsi condemned the attacks on mourning Copts in sharp terms. "Every attack on the cathedral is a personal attack against me," he said in a statement. But critics have accused him of paving the way for the increase in religious tensions with the pointedly religious character of his presidency "Young people must orient themselves around tolerance within the three monotheistic religions," said Hamdeen Sabahi, who campaigned as a representative of secular supporters in last year's presidential election. "We need to see more than just Muslim sheiks shaking hands with Coptic priests." The conflicts between Copts and Muslims haven't just led to an escalation in inter-religious tension. For some, they also discredit the goals Egyptians had in mind over two years ago when they instigated the revolution that thrust former President Hosni Mubarak from office. "That's supposed to be democracy," commented one frustrated young Copt upon reading media reports about attacks on his religious community. His remark expressed the political and economic insecurity many Egyptians have felt in the time following Mubarak's overthrow. Muslims demonstrate against President Morsi Exploiting the situation More than ever, it's important to take a critical look at the political situation in Egypt, said journalist and political scientist Ashraf Khalil, who wrote a thorough study of the Egyptian revolution. He noted that opposition to the current government doesn't just come from Copts and secularists. "There are a lot of people who are practicing Muslims - serious, practicing Muslims - who also don't trust Morsi, don't trust the Brotherhood," Khalil said, adding that he prefers to speak of Islamists and anti-Islamists since it's possible to be religious and still an opponent of Morsi's government. "It does not mean they are secular. They just don't want an Islamist government."


Tanks move in as Morsi backers, opponents clash over Egypt constitution Egypt's army has reportedly deployed tanks outside the presidential palace in Cairo. This follows clashes between opponents and supporters of President Mohammed Morsi over his plans for a constitutional referendum. Protests in Egypt between Morsi supporters and opponents continued into the early hours of Thursday morning. Tanks moved towards the presidential palace as President Morsi is expected to give a speech. In Cairo, protesters threw petrol bombs and rocks at each other near the presidential palace in the neighborhood of Heliopolis. Clashes broke out between the two sides after Islamists answered a call from the Muslim Brotherhood to march on the palace, where hundreds of anti-Morsi protesters were camped out. The tents outside the palace were torn down in the violence before riot police moved into the area. Health ministry officials report that at least four people were killed and 350 people were injured in the clashes. Meanwhile, offices of the Muslim Brotherhood were set on fire in the port city of Ismailiya. At offices of the organization's political wing, the Freedom and Justice Party, fires were also set in Suez. Morsi was a part of the Muslim Brotherhood before being elected president earlier this year. The protests stem from Morsi's November 22 decrees, which give him sweeping new powers and allow him to put the country's disputed new constitution to a referendum. Egypt's Islamist-dominated constitutional assembly approved the new constitution last week, and despite the violence, the referendum is still scheduled for December 15. Resignations abound As rumors circulated that there had been deaths in the Cairo protests on Wednesday evening, the president of the committee in charge of the referendum, judge Zaghloul al-Balshi, resigned from his post. "I will not participate in a referendum for which the blood of Egyptians has been spilt, and I call on President Mohammed Morsi to cancel the constitutional declaration immediately," al-Balshi said on al-Hayat television. Three of Morsi's advisers also announced their resignation late on Wednesday. Vice President Mahmud Mekki said there was a "real political will" to respond to the opposition's demands regarding the constitution. Opposition leader Mohamed ElBaradei said that Morsi was "fully responsible" for Wednesday's violence, calling the president's regime "oppressive and autocratic." ElBaradei, the former head of the UN nuclear agency, had previously said the Egyptian president's decrees give him the power of a "new pharaoh." He added that his side would not negotiate with Morsi until the constitutional declaration was cancelled. "The revolution did not happen for this," said ElBaradei, referring to the 2011 demonstrations that led to the fall of former president Hosni Mubarak. "It happened for freedom, democracy and human dignity." mz/mr (AFP, dpa, Reuters)


The BOBs: A Tunisian blog wins “A Tunisian Girl”, a blog by Lina Ben Mhenni, is this year’s international winner of Deutsche Welle’s blog awards. Mhenni is a former participant of a DW-AKADEMIE bloggers conference. "The BOBs" winner Lina Ben Mhenni For the past several years 27-year-old Tunisian Lina Ben Mhenni has been commenting in French, English and Arabic on her country’s social and political developments in a blog called atunisiangirl.blogspot.com. An instructor at Tunis University, Mhenni has been documenting Tunisia’s journey towards democracy following the revolution. During the protests in December 2010 and January 2011, she traveled to Sidi Bouzid and Kasserine to report on the repressions and violence there. Her blog was banned by the government for a long time and was only accessible outside the country. In October 2010, just three months prior to the revolution, Lina Ben Mhenni had taken part in the DW-AKADEMIE bloggers conference, the Young Media Summit, in Cairo. This year DW-AKADEMIE and the German Information Center Cairo (Deutschland-Zentrum Kairo) will again be organizing a conference for bloggers in the Egyptian capital. Eighteen Arab and German bloggers will meet from May 24 – 26 for the second Young Media Summit to discuss and blog about “New Media and Reform in the Arab World.” The Arab participants come from Egypt, Tunisia, Algeria, Syria, Bahrain, Palestine, Lebanon and Yemen. The participants will write about their discussions on the summit’s online platform as well as on their own blogs. They will also research specific topics, such as the changing role between Egyptian citizens and the state, and the role of women during the revolution and thereafter. “The situation in Egypt has completely changed since the last conference so participants will be able to speak even more freely than the last time,” says DW-AKADEMIE project manager Jens-Uwe Rahe. “Many bloggers and Internet users are now asking themselves how they can contribute in the long run to the changes in their country and society.” During the closing podium discussion, which will be open to the public, the Young Media Summit 2011 participants will present their results and discuss them with members of the audience. The event is to be held May 26, 2011 at Cairo University’s Faculty of Mass Communication and is entitled “Between Tahrir Square, Facebook and Al Jazeera: People and Media in the Arab Revolution”. Deutsche Welle’s Arab-language broadcaster, DW-TV ARABIA, will also produce a one-hour talk show in which Arab and German conference participants will discuss these and related issues with a young audience. The program will be broadcast May 27, 2011 on DW-TV ARABIA.


Kerry pledges aid to Egypt after Morsi assurances on IMF US Secretary of State John Kerry has offered more US aid to Egypt to help revive its economy during talks with President Mohammed Morsi. Unrest has continued in Port Said, with two civilians and two policemen killed. Kerry finished his two day visit to Cairo Sunday by holding what he called a "candid and constructive" meeting with Egypt's Islamist President Mohammed Morsi. "It is clear that more hard work and compromise will be required to restore unity, political stability and economic health to Egypt," Kerry told Morsi, whose tenure since his election last June has been marred by constitutional wrangles and protest. In Port Said on Sunday night two civilians and two policemen were killed as protesters and security forces clashed. The unrest began after authorities decided to remove from the city 39 detainees awaiting a verdict over alleged involvement in a deadly soccer match in Port Said in February last year. That verdict is due next Saturday. Last year's football riot left dead 74 people, mostly supporters of a visiting Cairo team. In January, a Cairo court passed death sentences on 21 other defendants, mostly from Port Said. Aid to follow reforms During his talks with Morsi, Kerry pledged $250 million (192 million euros) as the first part of a larger package of aid to Egypt, acknowledging the country's "extreme needs." The country has been struggling with a dip in currency reserves, a soaring budget deficit and an economy that has generally been slow to recover following the 2011 revolution. "The United States will now provide the first $190 million of our pledged $450 million in budget support funds," Kerry said, adding that Washington has also pledged an additional $60 million for a new joint Egyptian-American Enterprise Fund. Egypt will get the aid after "Morsi's assurance that he plans to complete the IMF process," Kerry said, referring to a $4.8 billion loan Egypt is currently negotiating with the International Monetary Fund. The loan was agreed in principle last November but was suspended at Egypt's request due to violent street protests the following month. The release of the rest of the $450 million and the other $550 million tranche of the $1 billion in US aid that President Obama promised last year will be tied to what US officials see as successful reforms within the country. Kerry said the separate $60 million in aid will be for a new fund for "direct support of key engines of democratic change." The top US diplomat added that the funding for that program could rise to $300 million over time. Politically divided After arriving from Turkey on Saturday, Kerry met with political figures, business leaders and representatives of outside groups, saying he heard their "deep concern about the political course of their country, the need to strengthen human rights protections, justice and the rule of law, and their fundamental anxiety about the economic future of Egypt." Kerry also spoke with opposition figure Mohamed ElBaradei on Saturday by telephone. ElBaradei and opposition figure Hamdeen Sabahi had refused to meet him in person. Egypt has seen months of political unrest, with the country deeply divided between Morsi's mainly Islamist allies and opposition groups that say the president has failed to meet the goals of the revolution. Morsi has been criticized for following in the footsteps of Mubarak, not carrying out reforms and trying to install a more religiously conservative government. The country is due to hold parliamentary elections in April, but liberal and secular opposition groups have said they will boycott the poll. Kerry called the vote "a particularly critical step" in Egypt's democratic transition. As Kerry left Egypt Sunday, protesters and security forces clashed in Cairo's Tahrir Square, the epicenter of the 2011 revolution. Protesters also blocked to the road to the capital city's airport, delaying Kerry's departure by a half hour until Security forces pushed them to another street. dr, ipj/rc (AP, AFP, Reuters, dpa)


