Amnesty accuses Tunisian authorities of torture ahead of key talks with Germany The rights group has reported 23 instances of torture committed by security officials. Tunisia's prime minister is to meet with Germany's Angela Merkel this week to discuss a deportation deal for rejected asylum-seekers. The rights group Amnesty International fears that democratic reforms in Tunisia are being undermined by a rise in "brutal tactics" used by the country's security forces. A report published by the rights group on Monday "exposes how entrenched impunity has fostered a culture in which violations by security forces have been able to thrive," Amnesty's North Africa research director, Heba Morayef, said. Titled "An End to the Fear: Abuses Under Tunisia's State of Emergency," the report details 23 cases of torture and ill treatment committed by the police, the National Guard and counterterrorism brigades in the past two years. Victims quoted in the report said they had "[been] brutally beaten with sticks and rubber hoses, placed in stress positions such as the 'roast chicken' position or forced to stand for prolonged periods, subjected to electric shocks, deprived of sleep or had cold water poured on them." One victim told Amnesty that his legs and feet were beaten until his toenails fell off. Living under the threat of terrorism Since the 2011 revolution that ousted President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali and sparked the Arab Spring, Tunisia has been hit by a series of attacks. In the past six years, Islamist assailants have killed more than 100 soldiers and police, around 20 civilians and 59 foreign tourists. The country has been under an ongoing state of emergency since a November 2015 attack killed 12 presidential guards. The report described "Tunisian security forces' reliance on the brutal tactics of the past, including torture, arbitrary arrests, detentions and restrictions on travel of suspects as well as harassment of their family members." "The chilling accounts detailed in this report signal a disturbing rise in the use of repressive tactics against suspects in terrorism-related cases over the past two years, providing a grim reminder of former President Ben Ali's rule," Amnesty reported. Permalink http://p.dw.com/p/2WI3Y Amnesty also expressed concern over travel bans imposed on at least 5,000 people, which officials say are designed to prevent selected young people from joining extremist groups such as the "Islamic State" abroad. "There is no doubt that the authorities have a duty to counter security threats and protect the population from deadly attacks, but they can do so while respecting the human rights protections set out in the Tunisian constitution and international law," Morayef said. Germany and Tunisia in talks over migrant deportations Prime Minister Youssef Chahed will visit Berlin this week for top-level talks concerning the expulsion of rejected Tunisian refugees from Germany. On Friday, German Chancellor Angela Merkel called for faster deportations of rejected Tunisian asylum-seekers and reiterated her push to classify Tunisia, along with regional neighbors Algeria and Morocco, as a "safe country of origin." She has also pledged to help Tunisia cope with the threat of extremism and help rebuild its economy. The issue has become a point of urgency following the December terror attack on a Berlin Christmas market. The perpetrator, Anis Amri, was a Tunisian refugee whose deportation was delayed by Tunisia's initial reluctance to confirm that he was one of its nationals. He went on to kill 12 people and injure 56 others in the truck attack. Amnesty's report will leave a shadow hanging over this week's talks and could have a major bearing on how Germany proceeds with its deportation policy. Immigration and deportations are expected to be among the key issues concerning voters ahead of Germany's general elections in September. dm/tj (AFP, dpa, KPA)


Microfinance - 'it has symbolic value' Essma Ben Hamida, co-founder of Tunisian microcredit institution Enda, was present when Ivanka Trump helped launch a loan program for women at the recent G20 summit in Hamburg. DW spoke to her in Tunis. DW: You were recently in Hamburg to attend the G20 summit where you participated in a panel (main picture fourth person from left between Ivanka Trump and World Bank head Jim Yong Kim) over the so-called Ivanka Fund, which is expected to be endowed with $325 million to promote women entrepreneurs in developing countries. How do you view this initiative? Essma Ben Hamida: First of all, I view positively all initiatives aimed at promoting women's empowerment and welfare in developing countries. For centuries, women in these places were totally excluded from economic life, even though they have always been natural entrepreneurs in that they always take care of the household, children and elders in the family. They contribute significantly to the prosperity of the household and also possess good administrative skills. When given an opportunity to work outside the home, they excel and shine. Unfortunately, I come from a country where women were long excluded from public life and restricted to their homes. Against this backdrop, any initiative that attempts to empower women is a good development. It's also good that the World Bank is setting a good example by launching this project, so that governments in developing countries could follow in its foot steps. Essma Ben Hamida: 'I view positively all initiatives aimed at promoting women's empowerment and welfare in developing countries' As a co-founder of Enda, the oldest microcredit institution in Tunisia, I was invited to the G20 summit and it has a symbolic value. Donors want to send a signal that a share of the funds will go to women who lack access to formal financial services. Moreover, it's not just about granting credit, but also about promoting entrepreneurship among women and equipping them with the skills they need to succeed in the market. How can an organization like Enda benefit from this new fund? We already receive funds from institutions like the World Bank as well as the International Finance Corporation (IFC). But we definitely need more resources to support an increasing number of small-scale entrepreneurs and the demand for credit has been high and on the rise. Since we began our work in 1995, we have dispersed over 2.5 billion dinars (around 879 million euros) in credit to about 650,000 Tunisians. Two-thirds of our clients are women. Unfortunately, our effort has not been supported comprehensively by the government. Microfinance allows women to initially test their entrepreneurial skills in small steps, at 200, 500 or 1,000 dinars. We would also like to promote digitalization. At present, our customers often have to wait about half a day at the counter to get a credit or to repay. So we have launched a pilot project to transfer the money using an electronic money card, but the legal framework is currently very restrictive. What kinds of challenges are usually faced by female entrepreneurs in Tunisia? In 1995, when we asked Tunisian women about what they saw as the major problems facing female entrepreneurs in the country, they stated the following three issues: A lack of access to startup capital and to training as well as a lack of support with regard to marketing. Today we have found a solution to the first problem and many people are receiving startup capital. But we still lack the means to provide training. Continuous education is, in my view, the decisive factor. We also organize trade fairs and the like to facilitate market access and networking. Men do business in cafes, hotels and clubs, but small-scale businesswomen cannot do the same as it's socially not well tolerated. Hence, our 80 offices across the country are a meeting place for women entrepreneurs. In other words, the entrepreneurs are most likely to benefit more when there is an accompanying program put in place than from mere funding. Is that right? One of our requests for the World Bank would be to obtain capital support, in order to be able to give more and higher loans. That's because many customers have been with us for a long time and need higher sums to grow their companies. At the same time, we need additional resources for the training of our customers, and I have to stress that is the most expensive part. I underlined in Hamburg that microfinance has allowed the poorest among the poor to finance themselves. Microcredit institutions, through the interest paid on their funds, can finance themselves, but we need support when it comes to training as we cannot afford doing that all by ourselves. Permalink http://p.dw.com/p/2bvJc It would be a good investment, as it could help create more jobs in the medium term as well as allow companies to become more professional and financially viable. We believe that our customers have so far not only found work for themselves, but have created around 100,000 additional jobs. Since the revolution in Tunisia a few years ago, we have also been supporting many startups founded by young people. We cannot, however, simply grant them credit and leave, as they also need support, for example on issues such as how to come up with a viable business plan. At present, we are working with the second generation: previously almost all borrowers came from the informal sector. Today, it is often their children, who have mostly had better education and are therefore starting under better conditions. But the youth unemployment rate in Tunisia remains high and that's why many of are turning themselves into entrepreneurs. So we have set up an incubator for them, where, for example, we offer startup consulting services to ensure that the firms are successful in the long run. Essma Ben Hamida is director of Enda Inter-Arabe (Enda), which she co-founded in 1990 with Michael Cracknell and President of the microfinance network of Arab countries Sanabel. In 1995, Enda launched the first microcredit institution in Tunisia, which today reaches thousands of active clients, mainly women, in the poor areas of Tunisia. The interview was conducted by Sarah Mersch in Tunis. 


Tunisian minister ousted for criticizing Saudi Arabia A Tunisian religious affairs minister has been fired from the government after linking Saudi Arabia's religious ideology with extremism. Is the criticism fair and does Saudi Arabia bear any responsibility for terrorism? The minister, Abdeljalil Ben Salem, had been relieved of his post by Tunisia's Prime Minister Youssef Chahed last Friday after claiming Saudi Arabia's religious doctrine, Wahhabism, inspires terrorism. The government claimed Ben Salem's remarks were an attack on the country's diplomatic values. New head of government in Tunisia, Youssef Chahed In an interview with Tunisian radio station Mosaique FM, Ben Salem told Saudis to "reform your school because terrorism has traditionally come from it. I say this to you with love and modesty" On social media, Arab Twitter users expressed their dismay at the decision to sack the minister. "Abdeljalil Ben Salam said yesterday that Saudi Arabia is the source of terrorism. He was fired from his ministerial post for saying the truth - what a crime!" tweeted Jalalet El Malik El Moathem "Those who respect humanity and tell the truth are punished in this world. The Tunisian Religious Affairs Minister has been fired because he accused Saudi Arabia of being a vehicle of terrorism," wrote the anti-Saudi government Twitter user "Victory of the Opposition." Closer alignment with Saudi Arabia Tunisia has often been considered the most liberal Arab nation, particularly near the country's capital, Tunis. The first president of the country, Habib Bourguiba, promoted secular values in the country, such as the separation of religion and government and the equality of women and men as enshrined in the 1956 Code of Personal Status. His successor, Zine El Abidine Ben Ali, continued the liberal religious policies until he was ousted and forced into exile in the 2011 Tunisian revolution. After several changes of government, the current setup, led by the Nidaa Tounes party, also maintains liberal values, but has pursued a pragmatic strategy of trading with the most conservative Arab country, Saudi Arabia. Former Tunisian President Zine Abedine Ben Ali, who fled to Saudi Arabia "Relations between the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the Tunisian Republic are both historic and well-established. The two nations cooperate in a variety of ways, politically, culturally and economically" said the Saudi Arabian Embassy in Tunisia's Arabic website. It also talks about a rise in mutual investments in each other's economies after the 2011 revolution. Wahabbism The economic ties enjoyed by the two countriesplayed a large role in Ben Salem's dismissal. The former minister's opinion that Saudi Arabia's Wahabbist religious ideology fuels extremism, however, is not uncommon. "A member of the US Congress has said that Saudi religious ideology is the cause of terrorism in the world" tweeted Zhret Tishreen, using the hashtag, "Wahhabism is the reason behind terrorism" Wahhabism, an ultraconservative form of Islam, is named after Muhammad ibn Abd Al-Wahhab. It's often considered to be a part of Salafism, a movement that believes life should be lived according to the Prophet Muhammad in the eighth century. Moreover, Wahhabism remains the state-sanctioned form of Islam in Saudi Arabia - a society where women cannot drive and religious police roam the streets. Critics of Ben Salam's dismissal in Tunisia are wary of the kind of influence Saudi money can have on Tunisia's secular environment. They also argue that Tunisia should follow in the footsteps of the United States and Europe, who have long enjoyed economic ties with Saudi Arabia but have recently started to accuse the Wahhabist ideology of being extremist. Saudi Arabia, the most conservative Arab country "After a period of indifference, the ties between the United States and Europe are beginning to fray with Saudi Arabia, a country which is being singled out as an accomplice and sponsor for spreading jihadism" said Tunisian writer Slaheddine Dchicha in a French editorial titled "Tunisia, Saudi Arabia and Jihadism" for the Kapitalis news organization. Confronting Extremism On Monday, Tunisia adopted a new plan to fight terrorism in the country. Tunisia's national security council, led by President Beji Caid Essebsi, released a statement that the "national strategy to fight against extremism and terrorism" relies on four principles, "prevention, protection, juridical proceedings and retaliation." No further details were released in the report. Although the country is relatively safe compared to the rest of the region, it faced tragedy last year after terrorist attacks struck the capital's Bardo Museum as well as the seaside resort town of Sousse. The violence left more than 70 people dead, many of whom were European tourists.


Tunisia: Women celebrate their rights Decades of protest have paid off: Tunisia's parliament has passed a historic law on violence against women. It punishes all forms of violence and sets the country up for a potential cultural revolution. Tunisia's parliament approved legislation on Wednesday that protects women from all forms of violence. The country's Family Minister Naziha Laabidi called it a "historic project." "It's a very important law," said Abir Alhaj Mawas, a sociologist who works for Terre des Femmes, a women's rights nongovernmental organization. The law addresses women who are isolated, she said, so that they can enjoy rights already common for women elsewhere, such as in Europe. The centerpiece of the law is, for Mawas, the paragraph dealing with punishing domestic violence. "Rape within the family has long been handled as a private matter easy to cover up, rather than a crime," she said. "This has now changed." No safety in marriage The new law changes how violence against women is prosecuted. Authorities must investigate a matter even if the woman herself rescinds her claim, regardless of cause for the claim's withdrawal. The law sees to the legal and psychological support for women who have been victims of violence in a way that aims to "support human rights and gender equality," Minister Laabidi said. Shelters and information centers are to be established where women can receive immediate assistance. Sociologist Mawas has welcomed the new law Tunisia's parliament also addressed a long-time demand of women's rights activists by striking down the paragraph protecting adult men from prosecution for having sex with a minor if he married her. Violence by the numbers Many women in Tunisia suffer from violence and harassment. A recently published study found that 64 percent of the 4,000 women surveyed would seek the permission of a male family member before leaving home. Nearly 70 percent reported being insulted on public transport, and 76 percent of married women reported physical and psychological violence at home. Such violence has a number of sources, Mawas said, including ideology and false interpretations of the Quran. The 2011 wave of uprisings across the Arab world, dubbed the Arab Spring, made matters for women worse, Mawas said. Protests often took an authoritarian turn, and women received the brunt of the violence, she said. Social conditions are also cause for violence against women. Poorly educated women have limited employment opportunities and can easily become victims of violence. "These women lack the means to make good on their rights," Mawas said. In Tunisia, the protests in favor of expanding women's rights paid off Conservative criticism There was broad support across Tunisian society for the new law, with calls for a cultural reform that compels men to accept women as equals. But by conservatives' religious standards, a person is a consenting adult from the age of 13, Islamic politician Noureddine Bhiri told the newspaper Jeune Afrique. Lawmaker Salem Labiadh told Tunisia's Business News newspaper that the new law "can lead to a radical feminism, destroy the foundation of the family and legalize homosexuality." Some readers reacted with disdain and mockery in the newspaper's letters to the editor section. Backward thinking There are also men who deny their wives rights without religious cause, due to external pressure, Mawas said. "They would be heavily criticized for giving their wives their freedom," she said, adding "even secular men are influenced by a religious climate." Women in the Arab world continue to suffer under conservative dogma, wrote the Tunisian newspaper, Le Temps. "This must change if we really want equality and dignity to become a reality."


Tunisian Women: Guardians of the revolution Tunisia's post-revolution constitution is seen as the most progessive in the Arab world. It guarantees freedom of religion, as well as gender equality. That's also due to the many women who were involved in the revolution of 2011: bloggers, housewives, activists, but also islamist women. Though divided in their political and cultural views, Tunisian women are united in the fight for more rights.


WorldLink: Rapping against IS Five years after Tunisia's revolution which ousted dictator Ben Ali and inspired uprisings across the Middle East, many feel bitterly disappointed. There are few jobs, and more than 5,500 Tunisians have joined the self-proclaimed Islamic State. Mehdi Akkari is famous in Tunisia as a rapper. After his brother joined IS and died in Syria, he started rapping against the radicals.


Rift in Tunisian government party widens A year ago, Nidaa Tounes topped the polls, now Tunisia's strongest party is breaking apart. The government coalition still holds, but the balance of power has changed. The various wings of Tunisia's secular Nidaa Tounes party have been at odds for quite some time. Now, the party has actually broken apart, just a year after winning both parliamentary and presidential elections and right on time for the fifth anniversary of the revolution that saw the overthrow of Tunisian dictator Ben Ali on January 14, 2011. Nidaa Tounes ("Call for Tunisia") was founded in 2012 by Beji Caid Essebsi, the country's current president, as a counterweight to the Islamist Ennahda party that dominated the country back then. In the 2014 election campaign, Tunisia's two major political parties started out openly hostile, only to enter into a strategic alliance, a four-party coalition. Nidaa Tounes lost its political opponent, along with the party's most important election campaign issue. Disappointed lawmakers turn their backs on Nidaa Tounes Ever since, internal disagreements about the party's orientation have emerged more openly than before. Critics accuse aging President Essebsi of aiming to install his son Hafedh at the top of the party and as his successor. Nidaa Tounes, critics also say, lacks democratic structures. Years after its formation, the party still has no elected party committees. Show of force Last weekend, the wing affiliated with Essebsi and his son met in Sousse to work out structures for an interim period and prepare for a party convention scheduled for the end of July. At the same time, dissenters gathered in the capital Tunis to prepare for the creation of a new party, led by former Nidaa Tounes Secretary General Mohsen Marzouk as well as former board members and lawmakers who stepped down from their positions. "Nidaa Tounes no longer exists!" declaimed Abada Kefi, one of 21 lawmakers who have resigned from Nidaa Tounes's parliamentary group. "There is no structure, there are no committees, there is no democracy and there are no ballot boxes." He added that party bosses rather than members decide on filling party positions. "All they are allowed to do is applaud," Kefi said, adding that the ministers for health and social affairs are leaving the party in protest. Deepening divisions While these politicians left Nidaa Tounes for partisan reasons, the party's rank and file is finding it difficult to come to terms with the fact that their conservative party entered into a coalition with the Islamist Ennahda. "I voted for Nidaa Tounes and I'm very disappointed at how it has handled itself since the polls," Mokhtar says, adding that he hopes a new party to be launched by former Secretary General Mohsen Marzouk will advocate more democracy and stand up for the economy - without Ennahda. The Nidaa Tounes group surrounding the president appears not to be concerned about its close quarters with the Islamists. Ennahda President Rached Ghannouchi was invited as a guest at the gathering in Sousse, where he held a speech that was received with much enthusiasm. "Tunisia is like a bird, and Ennahda and Nidaa Tounes are its wings," Ghannouchi described the two parties' relations. Mohsen Marzouk's backers fear a return to the autocratic style of the Ben Ali era "Nidaa Tounes is nothing but Ennahda's appendix," argues the party's ex-lawmaker Abada Kefi. Ghannouchi's presence at the meeting validated his decision to resign from the party, he says. New political balance of power Now that Nidaa Tounes is breaking apart, its concept of balancing Tunisia's political landscape is a thing of the past, says Tunisian lawyer Slim Laghmani. After all, he adds, between Ennahda and Nidaa Tounes, it's always been about the identity of Tunisian society and never about political or economic issues. The lawmakers' resignations have changed the balance of power in parliament and in the government: now the Islamists are the biggest power in parliament ahead of Nidaa Tounes. The as-of-yet unnamed bloc of dissenters is set to be the third-largest group. Nidaa Tounes lawmakers said on Wednesday that the UPL Free Patriotic Union, a junior partner in the four-party coalition, plans to join forces with the new parliamentary group - which in turn could make the prospective new party the strongest force in parliament. "Once again, Ennahda is calling the shots in politics," Slim Laghmani says. However, the Islamist party that suffered substantial losses in the last election, isn't interested in officially taking on government responsibilities, he says. Instead, he predicts, Ennahda will use the current legislative period to prepare for the next elections. Nidaa Tounes' former members plan to introduce their new party in March. A first test looms at the end of 2016, when Tunisians are scheduled to cast their ballots in municipal polls. The polls will show who benefited the most from the rift within Nidaa Tounes - the winner of the 2014 parliamentary vote.


Tunisia marks five-year anniversary of 'Arab Spring' revolts Tunisian officials, Nobel Peace Prize-winners and locals have gathered to mark the five-year anniversary of the start of its revolution. Despite progress, Tunisia still struggles with unemployment and the threat of "IS." Tunisia commemorated the five-year anniversary of the start of its revolution on Thursday with a ceremony in the struggling heartland city of Sidi Bouzid - the site of a self-immolation which ignited the Arab Spring revolutions of 2011. "Tunisia has definitely broken with tyranny, with no possible return to it," Tunisian Prime Minister Habib Essid said in a statement. Culture Minister Latifa Lakhdhar also announced that a "museum of the revolution" would be opened. The ceremony was attended by a few hundered people as well as Tunisian Nobel Peace Prize-winners who helped saved Tunisia's post-revolt transition by promoting dialogue between Islamists and secular rivals. "Freedom - our major achievement," extolled the local daily "La Presse" on Thursday. But the paper also noted that "if the revolution has led to freedom of expression and public participation, a lot remains to be done to ensure lasting social peace and sustained economic growth." Permalink http://p.dw.com/p/1HLQZ 'Demands have not been met' Disillusionment permeated the low-key celebrations on Thursday, as post-graduate unemployment remains high and the country faces the growing threat of radical Islam. The terrorist group "Islamic State" (IS) laid claim to three attacks in the country this year. Two of the attacks targeted tourists, dealing a major blow to Tunisia's economy. During the commemoration, around a dozen protesters gathered at the regional governor's office calling for "work, freedom and national dignity" - which was one of the main rallying cries during the 2010-2011 revolts. "Five years have passed and still our demands have not been met," protester Ramzi Hamzaoui told news agency AFP. Meanwhile, the region's governor, Mourad Mahjoubi, asked for patience: "We have gone through a very difficult period," he said. "Today, we have a development strategy and we will work. It's difficult, but young people must be patient." Five years ago, on December 17, 2010, 26-year-old university graduate Mohamed Bouazizi, who scraped by as a fruit seller, set himself on fire in Sidi Bouzid to protest police harassment and unemployment. He died from his injuries. The act of protest led to a 2011 revolt which overthrew Tunisian dictator Zine El Abidine Ben Ali. The movement then spread to other Arab countries, leading to the toppling of other autocratic regimes. rs/msh (AFP, AP)


Migration, security top agenda on Merkel's visit to Tunisia German Chancellor Merkel will meet Tunisian Prime Minister Chahed on the second day of her North African tour. Though Berlin and Tunis have promised to work together, tensions could arise over German deportation policy. In addition to her meetings with top Tunisian leaders on Friday, German Chancellor Angela Merkel will also give a speech to the Maghreb country's parliament as part of a diplomatic visit aimed at strengthening relations between Germany and Tunisia. Merkel has called Tunisia a "hopeful project," reflecting not only Germany's support for Tunisia's strides towards democracy since the Arab Spring revolutions in 2011, which started in Tunisia, but also the importance the chancellor places on Germany's relationship with the relatively stable nation as a means to manage migration to Europe and to speed up deportation processes. Partnership on migration and deportations Though Tunisians comprise a relatively small number of migrants attempting to enter Europe, Tunisian national Anis Amri, the alleged perpetrator of the Berlin Christmas market attacks, was a rejected asylum applicant, which could infuse Friday's bilateral discussions of migration with political tension. Merkel and Chahed lay wreaths at the site of the Berlin Christmas Market attack Merkel, who has described Germany and Tunisia as being tragically connected by the terror attack, will likely reiterate her calls for improved cooperation on faster deportation of rejected asylum-seekers. However, Merkel and Chahed's discussion could be complicated by both countries previous allegations that the opposite party failed to provide the documentation needed to facilitate Tunisians' returns to their homeland. Despite being held in a deportation cell for the maximum time allowed in Germany, Amria was not returned to Tunisia as Tunisian authorities did not issue him the necessary travel and citizenship documents.He had been living in Germany under several aliases. The controversial proposal for migrant holding camps in Tunisia and a migration agreement similar to that between the EU and Turkey are not expected to form part of the two leaders' discussions. Securing the Libyan border In contrast, Tunisia's border with Libya will be a key topic for the two heads of state. The conflict-ridden nation of former dictator Moammar Gadhafi has become a primary entry route for refugees fleeing to the EU. Merkel visited Egyptian President al-Sisi on Thursday Merkel also discussed stemming the migrant flow through Libya in her Thursday meeting with Egyptian President Abdel Fatah el-Sissi on day one of her two-day North Africa trip. While there, she described Tunisia, as well as Egypt and Algeria, as a major regional power with importance influence over Mediterranean migration crisis. Germany largely views Tunisia as a Middle Eastern success story and provides the country of nearly 11 million inhabitants with millions of euro in development aid as well as training for Tunisian security forces. However, international organizations, such as Amnesty International, have accused Tunisian security officials of undermining the country's fledging democracy through torture and human rights abuses. Tunisia also continues to be plagued by low economic growth, high unemployment and a decimated tourism sector. Permalink http://p.dw.com/p/2YZjR cmb/sms(AFP, dpa)


Tunisian presidential runoff date announced The electoral commission in Tunisia has announced the runoff vote for the country's presidential election will be held on December 21. The cradle of the "Arab Spring" revolutions is undergoing a transition to democracy. Tunisians are to go to the polls again on December 21 to choose between the two leading candidates for president, the country's electoral commission confirmed on Sunday. The hopefuls for the largely-symbolic presidential post are 88-year-old Beji Caid Essebsi of the Nidaa Tounes (Tunisia's Call) party and interim president Moncef Marzouki of the Congress for the Republic party. Nidaa Tounes, a secularist party, won the most votes in October's general elections. In the first round of presidential elections in November, Essebsi won the most votes. However, at 39 percent, it was not enough to win outright, which has resulted in the runoff. Marzouki won 33 percent of the votes in the first round. Islamists won elections held in 2011 after the Arab Spring revolution which toppled longtime ruler Zine El Abidine Ben Ali. Though Tunisia has remained relatively stable since then when compared with other "Arab Spring" nations including Syria, Egypt and Libya, the country faces economic troubles and a high unemployment rate. se/bw (AP, dpa)


When rap and film meet to spark a revolution Along with Spike Lee's latest film, "Chi-Raq," many movies remind that hip hop can still be used for activism today throughout the world, from Senegal to Israel. DW met some of these voices of freedom in Berlin. In 1989, Spike Lee featured Public Enemy's "Fight the Power" in his most famous film, "Do The Right Thing," to portray race relations in Brooklyn. Over a quarter of a century later, he uses once again the power of hip hop to spread his anti-gun message through "Chi-Raq," a film which revisits the ancient Greek play "Lysistrata" by Aristophanes, where women initiate a sex strike to end a war. Lee picked up the name of the movie from "a term coined by local Chicago rappers who likened their part of the city to Iraq," the filmmaker explained at a press conference during the Berlin International Film Festival. 'Chi-raq': using hip hop to spread the message The death toll for the South Side of Chicago is higher than that of any other American city. According to statistics from 2015, 2,996 people were shot in Chicago last year - one every 3 hours. Throughout the opening credits of the film, the lyrics of the song "Pray 4 My City" flash across a black screen in red, setting the tone by stating: "This is an emergency." "Chi-Raq" criticizes the structural and racial problems that allow gang violence to prosper in low-income neighborhoods, as the political will to change the situation is lacking. Yet, Spike Lee also aims to directly reach African-American youth by playing with the aesthetics of gangster rap. How hip hop deals with violence If hip hop initially served as a vehicle to denounce oppression and police brutality, drill rap, popular in Chicago, glorifies violence, guns and easy money. "Hip hop now glamourizes so many other things instead of actually using the art form to spread the word and concentrate on the real issues - as Spike has done time and time again," said the main actor of the film, Nick Cannon. For the Senegalese filmmaker Rama Thiaw, "the ego trip found in the phenomenon of American gangsta rap has sent hip hop through the looking glass. At first, real hip hop was a way to create awareness and educate the masses living in the ghettos," she told DW. From Brooklyn to Dakar Towards the end of the 80s, this political voice found its way to Dakar by plane, as stewards brought hip hop tapes they were discovering in New York with them. The message appealed to a generation affected by years of strikes. They wanted to express their rebellion against the French colonialist influence by adopting a new culture, says Rama Thiaw. Her documentaries show how this American influence has allowed rap to become a real game changer in the politics of Senegal. Her latest documentary, "The Revolution Won't Be Televised," followed the rappers of the band Keur Gui, who were among the initiators of "Y'en a marre" ("We're Fed Up"), a resistance movement which led to the pacific ousting of President Abdoulaye Wade in 2012. In a country where two-thirds of the population are under 25, the musical form of these politically articulated rappers made the difference. When Thiat and Kilifeu, two members of Keur Gui, discuss in the documentary about how their wobbly technical equipment is affecting their artistic development, they proudly remind themselves that they've achieved something Snoop Dog most probably never will: To launch a revolution. The revolution will not be televised The title of the film borrows from Gil Scott-Heron's most famous song, as a tribute to the spoken word poet who died in 2011 - the same year Senegal's pacific revolution started. The name was also chosen to point out that the Senegalese experience was barely covered by the international media, while all eyes were turned to the Tunisian revolutionary events during that same period. Thiaw believes that such a positive model had something shocking about it and that to spread it was to risk other pacific revolutions occurring throughout former French colonies. The activists could have chosen the easy way to luxury. In one scene, Thiat reveals that he was offered a villa and half a million dollars to publically announce he would leave the political movement. He refused the bribe. Udi Aloni at the Berlinale From Dakar to Tel Aviv While the Senegalese rapper Thiat wears a keffiyeh, the traditional scarf that has become a symbol of the Palestinian resistance movement, another vital hip hop scene has emerged there too. In the mid-90s, a young Palestinian called Tamer Nafar recognized his reality in Tupac's songs about police brutality and oppression and was inspired to rap about his own life. His band DAM, "Da Arabian MCs," launched the Palestinian version of hip hop. "Palestinian hip hop is clearly a voice of justice. It is also a voice of radical feminism," filmmaker Udi Aloni told DW. The Israeli has been collaborating with Tamer Nafar on several projects over more than a decade - most recently co-writing with him his film "Junction 48," which premiered in Berlin. This high-energy movie is based on Nafar's own experience, with the rapper playing a fictionalized version of himself. Kareem, the main character, lives in Lod - or Lyd, as the Palestinians refer to it - a city 15 minutes away from Tel Aviv. Scarred by the massive expulsion of Palestinians in 1948, Arab neighborhoods of this city now have limited social infrastructures and are affected by high-crime rates. "Junction 48" also reveals another clashing hip hop movement: When Kareem's band lands a first gig in a Tel Aviv club, he realizes most people there are fans of an extreme right-wing Jewish band. "There is definitely a strong movement of right-wing nationalist rappers among Israeli Jews. Although it's kind of a contradiction, they use hip hop to propagate hate against Arabs," Aloni explains. Scene from 'Junction 48' Overcoming restrictions As an Ashkenazi Jew, the activist Udi Aloni does not suffer from the censorship affecting many of his Palestinian colleagues: "I always say: It's a true democracy - for the Jews." He adds that he sees a more perfidious form of restriction among his Israeli colleagues: self-censorship. The filmmaker has chosen to ward off this attitude, no matter how it could affect his career. Using his privileged position as an Israeli Jew allows him to serve as the mouthpiece of Palestinian artists and promote the creation of "a bi-national language of togetherness, a mutual space for Palestinians and Jews," says Aloni - a vision he shares with his Palestinian friend Tamer Nafar. Despite the dark narrative portraying many of the hurdles to overcome before this ideal can be achieved, the dedication and energy conveyed by "Junction 48" is a source of hope. As Nafar puts it, "The film captures the spirit of those who fight oppression with their minds and creativity. These young dreamers are the passion behind the inevitable change." As one song in the film goes, until that change comes, rappers will continue to "Shake the Walls."


Tunisia's radicalized youth A suspect in the Berlin attack comes from Tunisia. Most of the foreign jihadis in Syria and Iraq also come from that country. Why are so many Tunisians recruited by "Islamic State" and al Qaeda? "He said he was going to spend the night at a friend's house. A day later we received a text message that he was in Syria." Iqbel Ben Rejeb's voice trembles as he recalls the day in March 2013 when his younger brother Hamza vanished. The programming student had been contacted by the Nusra Front and traveled to Syria via Libya. He was told he could manage the Qaeda affiliate's websites. Hamza is physically disabled and uses a wheelchair to get around. "I feared they wouldn't have time to take care of him," Iqbel remembers. "I thought they would stick a bomb to his wheelchair and blow him up." Hamza's family was able to save him and get him back to Tunisia. Soon thereafter, Iqbel founded a group to help other Tunisians who were stuck abroad get home - and to prevent others from being brainwashed by extremist ideas. Iqbel Ben Rejeb helps people to leave 'IS' Radicalization after revolution In the 1990s, some Tunisians went abroad to fight in conflicts in Afghanistan, Chechnya and elsewhere. After the country overthrew the strongman Zine El Abidine Ben Ali in 2011, however, the number of Tunisians who have joined terrorist organizations has increased dramatically. Historian and security expert Faysel Cherif says there are two main reasons why Tunisia produces so many extremists, and both are directly connected to the political upheaval of 2011. "Many people want to spread the euphoria that came with the revolutions of the Arab Spring to countries where this didn't happen," he says. Cherif adds that not all Tunisians were radicalized before they left the country. At the same time, extremists in Tunisia began the process of radicalizing young people after the Arab Spring. Most of the leading minds here had been detained during the Ben Ali era and were freed during the prison breaks and amnesties of the revolution. Lacking Strategy The dangers posed to the country by radicalization can be seen in the 2015 terror attacks on the Bardo Museum and a hotel in Sousse. Over 60, mostly foreign, tourists were killed. There was a further attack in November 2015, this time on the presidential guard, indicating that youth radicalization would appear to be on the increase. Recruiters are paid between $3,000 and $10,000 (2,900-9,600 euros) for each new person they sign up, according to information gathered by the United Nations. According to the Tunisian government, actions are already underway to hinder the recruiting process, including targeting mosques where radical preachers are known to disseminate their views. The Tunisian government has also taken repressive measures. More than 15,000 suspected extremists have been monitored since the beginning of the year, according to officials, with 700 added after the Sousse attack. Tunisians under the age of 35 are no longer able to travel freely to Libya, Turkey or Serbia, typical transit countries to Syria and Iraq. "We need a real strategy," the security expert Cherif told DW. "You can throw a hundred people into prison, but the machine will continue to run. Before you know it, 2 … 3 … 4,000 more will be spit out." The Tunisian government has increased its efforts to stop terrorism, for example by posting photos of wanted 'IS' fighters on Facebook. The greatest challenge will be to come up with a long-term strategy that will prevent young Tunisians from being attracted by extremist ideology. This has even been recognized by the head of the Tunisian government. Yet the more ground the so-called "Islamic State" (IS) loses in Syria and Iraq, the more concerned Tunisians are becoming about what will happen when the fighters return to their homeland. According to President Beji Caid Essebsi, there is no space in Tunisia's already over-flowing prisons. During a recent visit to France, the president vowed to monitor any return by "IS" fighters, even if it is unlikely that many could be brought to trial, due to a general lack of evidential material. With foreign support from the US and Germany, amongst others, the Tunisian military has been securing the borders to Libya and Algeria. The southern border, in particular, has been an important transit route for smugglers, weapons and potential terrorists. Iqbel Ben Rejeb's younger brother Hamza refuses to speak about what he went through in Syria. "But he was the one who came up with the logo for our group," his brother says with a proud smile.


Protests in Tunisia over return of jihadis like Amri Tunisia's parliament has been surrounded by hundreds of people, angry at the return of extremists who have fought abroad. The protest was prompted by the Berlin truck attack by Tunisian Anis Amri. Organizers said 1,500 people had attended Saturday's rally in the capital Tunis, many carrying banners reading "Close the doors to terrorism" and "No tolerance, no return." Protesters also waved Tunisian flags and sang the national anthem. Activists said they were angry at the lack of government action to prevent jihadists who fought overseas from returning to the country without facing punishment. The demonstration was held less than a day after Tunisian police said they had arrested three alleged Islamist extremists connected to Tunisian-born Anis Amri, the main suspect in Monday's Berlin Christmas market attack. Jihadis head home More than 5,000 Tunisians are fighting for jihadist groups abroad, mainly in Iraq, Syria or neighboring Libya, according to a UN working group on mercenaries. Hundreds of people gathered outside Tunisia's parliament Authorities say they have put more than 800 Tunisians under surveillance since returning home. But protesters said the government was not doing enough to round up ex-fighters upon return to face trial. One demonstration Faten Mejri said "for us, they are not Tunisians. They are awful people." Protestors also hit out at the head of the Islamist Ennahda party, who has in the past supported the idea of allowing Tunisian jihadists who "repent" and renounce violence to return home. President Beji Caid Essebsi said earlier this month that Tunisia would refuse to pardon Tunisians who fight for jihadist organizations. But he told the Agence France-Presse news agency that authorities "can't prevent a Tunisian from returning to his country." His comments were denounced on social media and in the press. Since its 2011 revolution, Tunisia has faced repeated jihadist attacks, killing more than 100 soldiers and policemen, as well as about 20 civilians and 59 foreign tourists, according to official figures. Amri was due to be returned Anis Amri was shot dead by police in Milan on Friday Intelligence agencies have warned several times that jihadists from the Middle East and North Africa may ply the migrant trail to Europe to carry out attacks. Twenty-four-year-old Anis Amri, who had claimed asylum in Germany but who had his case rejected, ploughed a truck into revelers at a Christmas market in an upscale Berlin neighborhood on Monday, killing 12 people and wounded nearly 50 others. On the run from German authorities, he was shot dead by police in Milan four days later. His deportation from Germany was never enforced because of delays by Tunisia in confirming he was one of their nationals. Amri's nephew was among three people, aged between 18 and 27, detained on Friday by Tunisian authorities, accused of being members of a "terrorist cell" connected to Amri. The country's interior ministry said in a statement that Amri had sent money to his nephew so he could join him in Germany, and had allegedly urged him "to pledge allegiance to Daesh," referring to the Arabic name for the "Islamic State" (IS) armed group. The unnamed nephew also claimed his uncle was the leader of a jihadist group based in Germany, known as the Abu al-Walaa brigade, it added. mm/kl (AFP, AP) Police in Leipzig arrested 22-year-old Syrian refugee Jaber al-Bakr after a two-day manhunt following the discovery of explosives and other bomb-making equipment at his apartment in Chemnitz. He was suspected of plotting to attack a Berlin airport. Two days later, he hanged himself in his prison cell. In July, the "Islamic State" (IS) claimed responsibility for two attacks carried out by asylum seekers. 15 people were injured in a crowded wine bar next to the entrance to a music festival in the Bavarian town of Ansbach after a rejected Syrian asylum seeker detonated an explosive device. The man killed himself in the attack. A 17-year-old asylum seeker wielding an axe and a knife went on a rampage on a regional train near Würzburg, seriously injuring four members of a tourist family from Hong Kong and a passer-by. The attacker was shot dead by police. German authorities said the teenager was believed to be a "lone wolf" inspired by the IS, but without being a member of the network. Three suspected members of the "Islamic State" terror network were arrested in the German states of North Rhine-Westphalia, Brandenburg and Baden Württemberg. Authorities say two of the men planned to blow themselves up in downtown Düsseldorf, while the other attacker and a fourth jihadist arrested in France planned to target pedestrians with guns and explosive devices. Police arrested three people over a bomb blast that injured three people in a Sikh temple in Essen. The bomb detonated after a wedding party, blowing out windows and destroying a part of the building's exterior. A 16-year-old suspect turned himself in after police showed footage of the attack from a surveillance camera and special police units arrested another young suspect in his parents' home. German-Moroccan Safia S. is charged with stabbing a police officer at the main train station in the northern city of Hanover. The 16-year-old girl is suspected of having been "motivated by members of the Islamic State group in Syria to commit this act," chief prosecutor Simon Heinrichs said. In separate raids across the country, police arrested three Algerians suspected of links to the "Islamic State" militant group and of having planned a terrorist attack in Berlin. The Berlin prosecutor's office said prosecutors were aware of a "concrete" plan to target the capital. The Eschborn-Frankfurt City loop bike race was called off after German police discovered it may have been the target of an Islamist terror attack. A 35-year-old German with a Turkish background and his 34-year-old wife were arrested on suspicion of planning the attack. Police found bomb-making materials in their home near the bike route. Author: Dagmar Breitenbach


Several Tunisian policemen killed in two 'jihadist attacks' Three policemen have been killed and four injured in central Tunisia after suspected jihadists opened fire on them. In a separate incident, militants killed a police officer in clashes on the Algerian border. The policemen came under fire at two security checkpoints in Sini Bouzid province, according to a statement issued by the Tunisian Interior Ministry on Monday. One suspected jihadist was killed and another wounded during the resulting shootout. Eight civilians were also injured, the ministry added. Hours later, militants attacked security forces along the Algerian border, leaving one policeman dead and four injured. "A national guardsman was martyred and four others wounded in Jendouba region on the border with Algeria during a shootout with a terrorist group," Mohamed Ali Aroui, a ministry spokesman, told the AFP news agency. The authorities have blamed al Qaeda-linked jihadists for the violence. Islamic extremist have repeatedly targeted Tunisia's security forces. The "Islamic State" (IS) jihadist group claimed responsibility for killing 21 tourists and a policeman in an attack on Bardo museum in the capital in March. Tunisia has seen an increase in Islamist extremism since the 2011 revolution that ousted Zine El Abidine Ben Ali and began the Arab Spring. shs/rc (dpa, AFP)


Tunisians frustrated by political situation One year has passed since Tunisia held its first post-Arab Spring elections last October. But the enthusiasm has given way to frustration. The government fears failure, and the opposition hopes to seize an opportunity. "Get rid of the militia," the protestors on Tunis' main promenade Avenue Bourguiba call. Several thousand demonstrators gathered in front of the Interior Ministry last week to vent their anger. They were calling for the resignation of the interior minister at the same spot where a major demonstration took place on January 14, 2011 - shortly before dictator Zine El Abidine Ben Ali fled the country. The march was sparked by the death of a union leader earlier this month during a protest in the southern town of Tataouine. The man, who officials claim died of a heart attack, was a functionary in the party Nida' Tounes (Call of Tunisia), founded by former Prime Minister Beji Caid Essebsi. According to Essebsi, militia groups are responsible for the man's death - militia closely linked to the powerful Islamist party Ennahda. "We are paying the price for a blessed revolution today," Essebsi said. "We are now paying with blood for democracy and for the success of democratic transition." He called the death the "first political murder" following the revolution. Redeemer or Ben Ali supporter? The death of the local politician marks the tentative high point of political disputes between the government coalition, which is dominated by Ennahda, and the Tunisian opposition. Nida' Tounes has gained ground in a short period within the opposition movements. Essebsi is very critical of the government coalition The party around Essebsi, who led Tunisia up until the 2011 elections, has become a melting pot for everyone wishing to create a counterweight to Ennahda. From liberal Islamists to left-wing groups, practically all political currents are represented there. In the latest surveys, support for Nida' Tounes lies at about 28 percent - almost as much as Ennahda, which can count on 30 percent of votes. But many members of Nida' Tounes were also part of Ben Ali's disbanded party RCD, said Ennahda spokesman Faycel Nacer. "Nida' Tounes is a good example of the former regime's influence," Nacer said. "There are many left-wing extremists who used to work with Ben Ali." Tunisia's civil society groups criticize that there are too many disputes and too few solutions. Those groups say the accusations from both sides are mainly politically motivated smokescreens. The truly important questions remain unresolved. The constitutional draft is still not completed and there is a dispute around the next election date remains. The judicial reform is only progressing sluggishly and officials from Ben Ali's days continue to pull the strings in the police apparatus. Revolution versus counter-revolution The economic problems, which were instrumental in sparking the uprisings of January 2011, continue to exist. Unemployment in inland regions is up to 50 percent in certain areas, food prices are rising, and the central bank only has three months worth of foreign currency reserves left. The police sealed off the Interior Ministry in Tunis Following the attack on the US Embassy in September, tourists are avoiding Tunisia - just after this significant economic sector had begun to slowly recuperate. More than half a million Tunisians are dependent on the country's tourism industry. Many citizens are demanding that the political parties work together to get a grip on these problems. They fear that the population will become the victim of the disputes between the government and the opposition - and in the end, be right back where they were before the revolution. The philosopher and journalist Youssef Seddik, one of civil society's most prominent representatives, says he does not want to give up hope just yet. "The revolution is fighting against the counter-revolution here," Seddik said. "I hope that we will have overcome this in two or three years. But I am very optimistic." Seddik said the process was under way. After all, the French Revolution also required time.


Nobel Peace Prize goes to Tunisian National Dialogue Quartet The Nobel committee in Oslo, Norway, has awarded this year's peace prize to Tunisia's National Dialogue Quartet. The committee honored the quartet's efforts for political dialogue following the Arab Spring. The Norwegian committee said the Quartet was awarded the 2015 prize for its "decisive contribution to the building of a pluralistic democracy in Tunisia in the wake of the Jasmine Revolution in 2011." The National Dialogue Quartet consists of four "organizations in civil society: the Tunisian General Labor Union (UGTT), The Tunisian Confederation of Industry, Trade and Handicrafts (UTICA), the Tunisian Human Rights League (LTDH) and the Tunisian Order of Lawyers," the committee explained. "This is a great joy and pride for Tunisia, but also a hope for the Arab world," UGTT chief Hussien Abassi told the Reuters news agency. Permalink http://p.dw.com/p/1GlhU The Quartet was formed in 2013, when Tunisia's efforts to introduce democracy were in danger of failing amid assassinations and social unrest. "It established a peaceful political process at a time when the country was on the brink of civil war," a statement on the Nobel Peace Prize website reads. "It was thus instrumental in enabling Tunisia, in the space of a few years, to establish a constitutional system of government guaranteeing fundamental rights for the entire population." Last year, the peace prize was jointly awarded to the young education activist Malala Yousafzai of Pakistan and children's rights activist Kailash Satyarthi of India A total of 273 nominations were made for the 2015 prize, ranging from Pope Francis to nuclear disarmament groups to the UN refugee agency UNHCR. In 2005, the peace prize, which has been awarded since 1901, was awarded to the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), which had led to speculation that 10 years on, the prize would again go to a person or organization advocating nuclear disarmament. The Nobel Peace Prize, worth 8 million Swedish crowns ($972,000/862,000 euros), will be presented in Oslo on December 10.


Tunisians vote to establish first democratically elected government The birthplace of the "Arab Spring" is voting to choose its first parliament. The exercise is being seen as Tunisia's first major step towards democracy following the revolution in 2011. More than five million Tunisians were expected to choose their representatives in 12,000 polling stations across the country, where voting began at 7:00 a.m. (6:00 a.m. GMT) and was scheduled to last until 6 p.m. local time. Results are expected shortly after. Security was tightened and more than 70,000 troops were stationed across the country for fear of Islamist attacks. The next round of elections for the president will take place on November 23. Citizens will select 217 leaders from 13,000 candidates representing more than 90 political parties for the country's legislature. Favourites for this year's elections include the Islamist movement Ennahda (renaissance), which was revived after democratic reforms in 2011. Ennahda had been banned by the former President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali's government. Ennahda became a major political force and soon after won the country's first free election to a constitutional council in 2011. However, major rifts were revealed between the Islamist party and other secular groups like the Nidaa Tounes. Tunisia's transition into democracy Tunisia finally got a new constitution in 2014 and a government of independents under Mehdi Jomaa was formed to steer the country into democratic parliamentary elections for the first time after the 2011 revolution. At the time, deadly protests rocked the country after citizens became increasingly frustrated with rising unemployment and high prices. Nearly 300 people were killed in the violence, which ultimately led to the ouster of President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali, who seized power in a bloodless coup in 1987. Despite recent attacks by extremists, labor unrest and high inflation, Tunisia's democratic reforms have been on track, unlike its other neighbors who experienced violent protests against the government. The parliamentary elections and the polls in November are intended to complete the democratization of Tunisia, which is often referred to as the birthplace of the "Arab Spring." mg/slk (AFP, dpa, AP, Reuters)


Tunisians have little cause to celebrate Zine El Abidine Ben Ali ruled Tunisia with an iron fist for more than 20 years before he fled the country in January 2011. But two years later there is still little to celebrate for most Tunisians. The road to democracy is more difficult than Tunisians had hoped after Ben Ali fled the country on January 14. During December 2011, people were on the streets for four weeks in protest of the social and political issues, following the self-immolation of a Tunisian street vendor who set himself on fire to protest the confiscation of his goods. Two years on, most Tunisians continue to face the same problems. "The situation could be better," a student named Mohamed said. "There are so many social and political problems. If the ruling government and the opposition could work together, then things would move forward." But the government is struggling to get the country's economic problems under control. The economy is still suffering from the the effects of the revolution. Many tourists are afraid to visit the country and foreign investors have been put off by strikes and road blocks, which shut down production. The unemployment rate is around 17 percent, higher than before the revolution, according to goverment figures. Almost half of the population is unemployed in some parts of the country, especially in the interior. And around 40 percent of university graduates are looking for jobs. Empty pockets Tunisians are experiencing the effects of the crisis in their wallets and purses as a result of rising food prices. The inflation rate is around 6 percent. Milk has hardly been sold for the last three years, meat and potatoes are so expensive that most people cannot afford them. The tense situation frequently forces Tunisians onto the streets. One of the protestors is lawyer Hayat Jazar. Nothing works, she said. "There is absolutely nothing happening. There is no justice and no work. The demands of the people are not being put into place, apart from the freedom of expression," she explained. But the government, which is led by the moderate islamist party Ennahda, is doing everything it can to keep people quiet. Charges brought against critical bloggers and journalists are common. Many Tunisians say that little has changed for the better two years after Ben Ali's ouster "So we we'll have a government like we did under Ben Ali," Jazar said. The protesters demanded a new constitution directly after the revolution in order to break away from the dictatorial structures forever. In October 2011, Tunisians voted for a constituent assembly, which was to give the country a new constitution. Actually, that had to be done within a year, but the elected officials need more time than they had initially thought. Still hopeful Mohamed, the student, closely follows the work of the elected officials. And he is disappointed by their work. "The representatives fight over trivial issues that don't affect the people. It's pure politics. If the constitution is finished in two, three years and there are new elections, then the situation in Tunisia will definitely be better," he said. Lawyer Hayat Jazar also doesn't want to give up hope that Tunisia will successfully reach the end of the road to democracy - even if there are a few detours along the way. It's not lost as long as the people have the freedom of expression, she said. "The revolution is like dough with yeast. It takes a while to rise," she added. In the end she believes that Tunisians will use their newly found freedom to advance democracy.


Pulse: Inkyfada Tunisia has struggled to find its footing as a democratic society over the last five years since the 2011 Jasmine Revolution. But one young group of independent journalists, called Inkyfada, are trying to push investigative journalism to new levels in the country, and in the process taking on and breaking the traditional bounds of Tunisian society and politics.


Anti-Islamist Essebsi wins Tunisian election Anti-Islamist Beji Caid Essebsi has won Tunisia's presidential election with over 55 percent of the vote, according to the electoral commission. Essebsi (pictured above), an 88-year-old political veteran, will be the first freely elected president since the country gained independence from France over a half century ago. A former prime minister, Essebsi clinched 1.7 million of votes cast against main opponent Moncef Marzouki's 1.3 million in Sunday's runoff, electoral commission chief Chafik Sarsar told a news conference on Monday. The election is seen as a landmark for democracy in the North African nation where the Arab Spring was born, and it sets Tunisia apart from its neighbors such as Egypt and Libya where turmoil persists despite popular up risings that toppled dictators Hosni Mubarak and Moammar Gadhafi, respectively, in 2011. Essebsi took 39 percent in the first round of voting on November 23, six percentage points ahead of 69-year-old former rights activist Marzouki, who was installed by parliament two months after polls in December 2011. The recent campaign was marked by obstinate mudslinging, with Essebsi refusing to debate with Marzouki and calling his opponent an "extremist." Essebsi insists that Marzouki represents Islamists, and says they have "ruined" the country since the 2011 revolution which toppled veteran ruler Zine El Abidine Ben Ali and sparked the Arab Spring. Back to the future? Marzouki, in turn, has accused Essebsi of wanting to restore the old guard deposed in the revolution. Indeed, Essebsi is no stranger to Tunisian politics, having served as a high-ranking official both under the founder of independent Tunisia, Habib Bourguiba, and his successor, Ben Ali. After Ben Ali's ouster, the moderate Islamist party Ennahda dominated politics in Tunisia but was unable to meet the challenges posed by an ailing economy and political unrest, including terrorist attacks. Essebsi formed his secular Nida Tunis coalition to oppose the Islamists. He is now poised to consolidate power, as Nida Tunis came out on top in October's parliamentary election. This has led to some concerns of a return to an authoritarian style of government in Tunis. glb/lw (Reuters, AP, AFP)


Facing the challenge of dealing with Tunisia's past Ibtihel Abdellatif has been dealing with the injustices of Tunisia's dictatorial past for years - first for her NGO, and now in the government's Truth and Dignity Commission. But internal squabbles are impeding her work. "The revolution is our life. We were almost dead inside, but it has returned us to life." One of the first things that Ibtihel Abdellatif did following the ousting of longtime Tunisian President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali on January 14, 2011 was to make her way to the university. There, after more than 10 years away, she completed her masters degree in religious studies. The press, speech and education were once again free after years of dictatorship. There was optimism in the air, many new organizations were established and civil society, long suppressed, was once again flourishing. Abdellatif has long been politically active, standing up for civil rights Along with some fellow activists Abdellatif, 45, founded Nisa' Tounsiat ("Tunisian Women"), a non-governmental organization that helps female torture victims. They've since documented more than 200 cases, most of them among the Islamist opposition which was heavily persecuted under Ben Ali. Three years later I meet with Abdellatif in a barren, unused office smelling of stale cigarette smoke. In this disused bank, the Tunisian government set up its Truth and Dignity Committee. Its nine members share five sparsely furnished rooms on the top floor of the building. Abdellatif was chosen as representative of the civil society to take part in the independent commission. Its task: to come to terms with almost 60 years of oppression. From Habib Bourguiba, Tunisia's first president after independence, up to Ben Ali, torture, occupational bans and long prison sentences hit members of the various opposition movements over the years. From freedom to reconciliation "On January 14, when no one yet knew what had happened and we only had an old piece of bread to eat, this bread was the best I've ever eaten," said Abdellatif, describing her feelings after the dictatorship came to an end. "We were free. Dictatorship, oppression and torture are not allowed to return under any circumstances." But the path from freedom to reconciliation is long, and transitional justice remains one of the most controversial topics in Tunisian politics. That has not changed since the commission started its work this past summer. Abdellatif knows that she and her colleagues can easily become the playthings of the various parties. She squirms a bit at the question, rearranging her headscarf and jacket. She only speaks reluctantly about politics since she began her new job. The secular Nidaa Tounes party, and leader Beji Caid Essebsi, are no friends of the commission More than any other, the secular Nidaa Tounes party - which brought in the most votes in the October parliamentary elections - is a particular thorn in their side. But the commission is enshrined in the constitution, and works for the Tunisian citizens and not for the politicians, Abdellatif stresses. "Any attempt to attack us would be an attack on the constitution, which of course was adopted by all the parties," she says, adding that this would be a very dangerous move. Fighting for victims' dignity Critics have called the transitional justice system a stillbirth, saying it has come too late and has become too politicized. The Truth and Dignity Commission must overcome many obstacles, not the least among them being internal squabbles. There is no consensus over which victims are entitled to reparations, leading to constant friction between the various camps. From leftist feminists to dissidents in exile and representatives who, like Abdellatif, count themselves as being closer to the Islamists, the commission is quite mixed. Two members have already stepped down, and one had to be replaced. But now work appears to be running smoothly, leaving no room for political disputes. "On the contrary. We have such a big task ahead of us that there is no time to argue about something that has nothing to do with our actual work," she says. The Arab Spring protests, which led dictator Ben Ali to flee the country, were just the start for Tunisia Now, what's important is to give victims back their dignity, says Abdellatif. For those who suffered under the dictatorship, financial compensation is much less important than the recognition of their fate. Numerous calls from concerned citizens every day showed that many have high hopes, and Abdellatif remains convinced that the "commission is a symbol of dignity, for democracy and revolution." For Abdellatif, the eldest of five sisters, her work in commission is the logical consequence of her commitment to the rights of victims of the dictatorship. For her, it's also a way to refute a prevailing stereotype of Muslim women. "I am married and have three sons; I'm surrounded by men," she says. "When I said that I wanted to engage in civil society they supported me. And had that not been the case, I would have done it anyway." "I feel that I'm respected as a woman," she says - another small personal victory.


Tunisia's youth take to the streets – again Frustrated with the persistent lack of opportunities five years after the Arab Spring, people are taking to the streets in Tunisia once again. Their message to Tunisian authorities is clear: Provide jobs or risk another revolution.


Tunisian presidential poll looks set for runoff vote Tunisia's incumbent President Moncef Marzouki is set to face secular former premier Beji Caid Essebsi in a run-off vote for the presidency. Neither man could manage an outright majority in the first round. Marzouki's campaign manager said late on Sunday that his candidate was level with former premier Beji Caid Essebsi, or possibly in the lead. "At the worst we are even but at best we're between two and four percent ahead," Adnene Mancer told reporters optimistically, after polling closed. However, exit polls conducted privately showed that former prime minister Essebsi, who had been the favorite among the 27 presidential candidates, had clinched between 42.7 percent of the vote and 47.9 percent. The same polls showed that Marzouki - who was installed as president by parliament in 2011 rather than being directly elected - had managed to garner between 26.9 percent and 32.6 percent. A head-to-head contest between the two appears likely. Electoral rules state that there should be a runoff poll between the two leading candidates, should no-one secure more than 50 percent of the vote. Essebsi's campaign manager Mohsen Marzouk told journalists that a second round was likely, despite his candidate's clear lead. "Essebsi is ahead according to initial results, with a big difference to the next candidate," said Marzouk. "There is a strong possibility of a second round." Sunday's vote follows a general election in October when the Nidaa Tounes party won the most seats in the parliament. It beat the moderate Islamist party Ennahda, which won the first free poll in 2011 after the toppling of dictator Zine El Abidine Ben Ali. Authorities put turnout at around 64.6 percent, with some 5.3 million people eligible to vote. Tens of thousands of police and troops were deployed amid fears that Islamist militants might try to disrupt polling. Critics have warned that Essebsi, who served under both of the former presidents, aims to restore the old regime. But while Marzouki argues that only he can preserve the gains of the uprising, his own detractors claim he sabotaged the spirit of the revolution by allying himself with Ennahda. Other candidates in the first round on Sunday included the leftwinger Hamma Hammami, businessman Slim Riahi and the sole female candidate, magistrate Kalthoum Kannou. rc/av (AFP, AP, Reuters)


Tunisians go to polls in first presidential election Tunisia is holding its first direct presidential elections since the overthrow of long-term dictator Zine El Abidine Ben Ali. The poll represents the latest stage in attempts to consolidate democracy. Polling stations have opened across Tunisia, as the country seeks to choose its first elected president since the 2011 uprising that sparked the wave of similar rebellions across the Arab world known as the Arab Spring. The election, Tunisia's first multi-candidate presidential poll, has been described as the final stage of transition to democracy in the birthplace of the Arab Spring. The country's incumbent President Moncef Marzouki - who was installed in the post by parliament just two months after a general election in 2011 - is one of nearly 30 contenders in the election. Some 5.2 million Tunisians are eligible to vote at about 11,000 polling stations. Preliminary official results are expected by Tuesday and, if there is no candidate with an outright majority, a run-off vote between the top two will be held on December 28. Until the revolution, Tunisia had only had two presidents. Habib Bourguiba, who led the Tunisian state after independence from France in 1956, was the first, before being deposed by Zine El Abidine Ben Ali. Ben Ali's ouster in 2011 followed protests over high prices and unemployment that inspired the Arab Spring in countries such as Egypt, Syria and neighboring Libya. Unlike those countries, Tunisia has remained largely stable. While there have been setbacks - including the murder of two opposition members - secular and religious rivals have largely managed to compromise. Former PM is frontrunner Among the other contenders are former Prime Minister Beji Caid Essibsi, the 87-year-old founder of the secularist Nidaa Tounes (Tunisia's Call) party. Indeed, Essibsi is seen as the frontrunner after his party came first in October parliamentary elections. Nidaa Tounes came first with 85 seats in the new 217-member parliament, while the moderate Islamist party Ennahda - winner of the first parliamentary elections - secured 69 seats. Ennahda has not put forward a candidate and has invited its members "to elect a president who will guarantee democracy." Also standing is El Hammami - a veteran leftist who was tortured and imprisoned for his communist activities under Bourguiba and Ben Ali from the 1970s onwards. While polling was scheduled to take place for a 10-hour period in most of the country, it was restricted to five hours in some 50 districts where armed rebels are active close to the Algerian border.  rc/tj (AFP, AP, dpa, Reuters)


Tunisia three years after the revolution Three years after the overthrow of President Ben Ali, Tunisians are still waiting for their new constitution. There have been quite a few empty promises since 2011, but there is also some progress. "It was a central aim of the revolution not to let just a few benefit," Souail Aidoudi says. "But that aim has not been honored." Aidoudi, a 32-year-old unemployed academic, accuses Tunisia's post-revolution politicians of incompetence. "There are too many people in Tunisia who are pushed aside, who have no access to work, who don't participate in society and live in great uncertainty," he says. He once was a student of management sciences, but he's been unemployed for ten years, and now, he makes a living taking on odd jobs as waiter, porter and kitchen help: "I can't afford to have a family." Democracy is a prize Souail Aidoudi is disappointed in the progress made so far Many young Tunisians share Aidoudi's fate. They may have university degrees, but they can't find a job. About 700,000 of the 11 million Tunisians are unemployed, 400,000 of them are graduates - a time bomb waiting to explode, says Salem Ayari, head of an NGO for jobless academics: "There were plans for employment programs, but they weren't implemented." Tunisians aren't just waiting for jobs. They are waiting for a new constitution, which was promised for the third anniversary of the Ben Ali's ouster on January 14. Tarek Sanaa is dismissive, like most of his fellow countrymen, he doesn't believe in such promises. "The current elite following the revolution regards democracy as their loot," the 60-year-old silversmith says. "They use it like a tool to guard their own interests and to enrich themselves." Sanaa took over a shop on Avenue de Bourguiba from his father. He regards himself as a chronicler of the revolution that started right at his doorstep three years ago. It's important that the young people see perspectives for the future, and stay in the country, he says. "I've got my money on the generation of young people between the ages of 20 and 30, who are growing up in an atmosphere of freedom," he says and adds, this generation will promote the revolution. "We need a revolution in the way we think." Learning to handle freedom People must learn how to deal with their new liberties, says Amel Grani "Our society must learn how to deal with this newly-won freedom," women's rights activist Amir Grani agrees. "That's true for judges and teachers, but also for journalists and artists." The democracy movement can, however, take credit for establishing the freedom of the press. Today, Tunisia has more than 40 radio stations and as many newspapers, offering a variety of opinions instead of state propaganda and censorship. That's a direct result of the revolution, says Béchir Ouarda, who coordinates an NGO for the protection of the freedom of the press (CCDLE). Tunisians can choose from a wide array of media now But Ouarda feels the freedom of the press is threatened; he says the government has increasingly tried to manipulate the media since the Islamist Ennahda party came to power. "There is a tendency to return to the methods of the Ben Ali dictatorship to influence the media," Bechir Ouarda says. Staff is chosen accordingly: "People close to those in power are given jobs at the head of the state media; at the same time, new broadcasting stations emerge, broadcasting without a license." The greatest threat to the budding media diversity is its lack of funding and expertise. Many new radio and TV stations are unprofitable and depend on financial aid from businesses. Most of all, they lack the means or the courage to fulfill their actual duty, which is finding and researching topics which those in power want to keep under wraps. At the mercy of the rulers Tunisia's journalists haven't yet found their feet as critical and independent reporters, Ouarda says, adding that they avoid some important issues. Salem Ayari agrees the media should act as a control authority critical of Tunisia's transformation. "Our media don't uncover inconsistencies," he says. "They don't ask where the money goes and why the funds don't go to the employment programs as planned - they have quickly become pawns of power in Tunisia."


Tunisian forces kill nine ahead of anti-extremism rally Tunisian troops have killed nine militants as part of a crackdown on Islamists following a deadly attack in Tunis almost two weeks ago. Meanwhile, thousands of Tunisians were expected to join a rally against extremism. A spokesman for Tunisia's Interior Ministry said on Sunday that security forces had killed the alleged extremists in the south of the country late on Saturday. "Our forces killed nine terrorists in a large operation in Sidi Aich in Gafsa. They also captured arms and explosives," spokesman Mohamed Ali Aroui told the Reuters news agency. The news of the operation came just hours after it emerged that a fourth French national had died of wounds sustained in an attack on tourists at the National Bardo Museum in Tunis on March 18, raising the death toll to 22. Tourists from Italy, Japan, Spain, Colombia, Australia, Britain, Belgium, Poland and Russia were among the other victims. The "Islamic State," which has seized large swathes of territory in Syria and northern Iraq over the past year, has claimed responsibility for the attack, in which two of the gunmen were shot dead by security forces. Tunisian authorities though, have blamed the local Islamist group Okba Ibn Nafaa for the attack. Anti-extremism march Meanwhile, thousands of Tunisians and several foreign dignitaries, including French President Francois Hollande and Italian Prime Minister Matteo Renzi were expected to join a rally against extremism in Tunis later in the day. The march through the capital is to end at the Bardo Museum, where a stone tablet dedicated to the victims of the attack is to be officially unveiled. Tunisia has seen in increase in Islamist attacks since longtime strongman Zine El Abidine Ben Ali was toppled in a popular uprising in 2011. However, the country that was the cradle of the "Arab Spring" revolutions that swept through the region at the time has also widely been regarded as a model of successful transition to democracy. pfd/sms (Reuters, AFP)


Tunisian blogger stays politically active Lina Ben Mhenni is a Tunisian blogger who was active in the 2011 revolution and has been nominated for several awards including Deutsche Welle's own BOB prize. Two years after the revolution, many feel the governing moderate Islamist party has betrayed the people. Ben Mhenni is engaged and on top of the changes in the country.


National Dialogue Quartet pride of Tunisia Members of the Tunisian National Dialogue Quartet picked up the Nobel Peace Prize in Oslo. In 2013, the group swept in to clean up the mess and establish democracy after the Jasmine Revolution failed to produce stability.


The last Jews in Tunisia Jews lived in North Africa before the arrival of Christianity or Islam. On the eve of Tunisia's independence from France, there were more than 100,000 of them in the country. Half a century later, as few as 1,500 remain. Two years ago, Tunisians took to the streets and overthrew President Ben Ali, triggering the protests across the Arab world that became known as the Arab Spring. The revolution promised freedom and democracy. That same freedom has also brought instability however, and Tunisia's minority Jewish population is vulnerable. Jamel Bettaieb comes from Sidi Bouzid, the birthplace of the Tunisian revolution. The young language teacher and activist was at the heart of the protests that led to the downfall of the Tunisian president and triggered the Arab Spring. Bettaieb is now concerned that freedom of speech is providing a platform for extremists to voice hate campaigns against Tunisia's Jews. "In the last few months an imam went on television and spent an hour speaking negatively about the Jews. Where was the reaction of the government? There was nothing. I criticize society. Civil society should say this is unacceptable. People should care," said Bettaieb. Rise of Islamist politics Under President Ben Ali, Islamists were arrested and political parties banned. Now, however, the country is experiencing a religious revival. Tunisians chose the moderate Islamist party, Ennahda, to lead their first democratically elected government after the revolution. Ennahda's leadership has promised to protect Tunisia's Jewish community but many grassroots supporters are hostile to the Jews. The country's growing ultra-conservative Salafist movement are thought to number 10,000. Eyewitnesses say the group has been chanting anti-Jewish slogans at protests in Tunis, the Tunisian capital. The Great Synagogue of Tunis, built in 1938, now stands basically empty Salafists have a strict interpretation of the Koran and believe in creating an Islamic state governed by sharia law. Thousands of Salafists who had been imprisoned by Ben Ali were released after the revolution. Many in the Jewish community quietly admit that they felt safer under Ben Ali. "Now we live in fear of the Salafists," one woman told DW. For the moment, much of the anti-Semitism has remained rhetoric. But the potential for violence remains very real. Tunis' central synagogue on Liberty Avenue is surrounded by barbed wire and protected by armed soldiers. Built in the 1930s, the synagogue stands as a symbol of the community's confidence. Today, only a shadow of that thriving community lives on. A tiny community remains In a hall backing onto the synagogue, a gathering of Jews celebrate a rare occasion: a bar mitzvah. The celebration marks the coming of age of a Jewish boy. Tunisian Jews have travelled from France and the Tunisian island of Djerba, home to the country's largest Jewish community, to take part in what has now become a rare celebration in the capital. There are only a small number of young Jews among the guests. Even their parents' generation is scarce. The Jewish community is ageing. Roland Sa'adon is the cantor, or singer of prayers, at a synagogue in La Goulette, a seaside suburb of Tunis. He has spent all his life in Tunisia and wants to remain in the country of his birth. Like many Jews here, his children live abroad, and soon he will be forced to leave Tunisia to be with his family. Since the revolution, Sa'adon has come to believe that the future of the Jewish community is at risk. "The Islamists have taken over the revolution, a revolution that was led by young people," he told DW. "If the Salafists win support then it will be difficult - not just for us, but for many Muslims as well. I don't think most Tunisians are extremists, but if they are and that's what they choose, then there will be no place for us in Tunisia." A small group of Jews celebrate a bar mitzvah in central Tunis One of the few younger guests at the bar mitzvah, Isaac Hayoun, says that while he feels safe in Tunisia, he too will leave. “I am practically the only young practising Jewish teenager in the capital," he told DW. "After high school I will move to France." He adds, that if he wants to marry a Jewish woman, he is very unlikely to find one in Tunisia. "It's a shame because it's a beautiful country, but ours is a community that lives in the past.” Jews have been gradually leaving the country since its independence in 1956. Many moved to France and Israel. Some left for financial reasons; there were more opportunities abroad. Others left after the rise in anti-Semitism that followed Israel's conflicts with the Arab world. Remembering Jewish history Habib Kazdaghli is a professor of contemporary history at the University of Tunis who specializes in Jewish history. It is important that all Tunisians learn about the country's Jewish community, he says. "Our country lost part of itself. We must now teach students about our past. I now have many students who are not Jews," he explains. "It is not a Jewish past, it is a Tunisian past." Seeking to preserve that past, a new museum and website called Dar El Dhekra (meaning "House of Memory") has been founded. It's dedicated solely to Jewish history and culture in Tunisia. For the moment at least, this tiny community appears to be hanging on to see what post-revolution Tunisia has in store for them.


Abbassi helps Tunisia talk its way to peace, security Tunisian labor leader Houcine Abbassi will receive the German Africa Prize for the key role he played in Tunisia's revolution in 2010/2011. A founder of the Mediation Quartet, he also received this year's Nobel Prize. From his office at the Tunisian Labor Union Confederation (UGTT) in downtown Tunis, Houcine Abbassi looks out over Mohamed Ali Square. Portraits of the union's founding fathers and Abbassi's predecessors look down from the walls of the modest office with its heavy wooden table and worn leather armchairs. Here, outside the historic seat of the Labor Union Confederation, is where the first demonstrations took place in the capital in late December 2010, after protests had already been raging across the country for days against ruler Ben Ali. At the time, Abbassi was a member of the union board in charge of legal issues and conducting studies, and he remained in the background as events unfolded. One year later, the union rid itself of its pro-regime leader from the days of Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali and elected consensus candidate Abbassi. The 68-year-old teacher, who took over as head of the UGTT in 2011, can look back on more than 40 years of experience in union work. Born into a farming family, he grew up some 100 kilometers (62 miles) south of Tunis and became involved in the local teachers' union in the 1970s. In 2002, he became chairman of the union council in the Kairouan district, and in 2006 a member of the executive bureau in Tunis. His subsequent term as secretary general would turn out to be one of the most eventful since the founding of the confederation in 1946. General strike as a means of pressure Although Tunisia is the only country to have seen positive developments since the Arab Spring, it is still plagued by frequent violence, setbacks and crises. The UGTT often plays an active role as intermediary in these cases. With its more than 700,000 members, in a country with a population of about 11 million, the Labor Union Confederation is well-connected throughout the country and is able to quickly mobilize its members, as it already demonstrated in the days of the revolution. When opposition figure Chokri Belaid was assassinated in February 2013, the union called for a general strike on the day of his funeral - and all of Tunisia stood still. When Chokri Belaid was murdered in February 2013, the union called a general strike - and all of Tunisia stood still For Abbassi, the general strike is the most powerful form of leverage that can be exercised when all else fails. In the summer of 2013, when in the midst of the fasting month of Ramadan MP Mohamed Brahmi was murdered, Tunisian political life was plunged into a crisis and Abbassi felt called upon to seize the initiative. The man with short grey hair spearheaded a quartet of intermediaries made up of the union, the employers' association, the Human Rights League and the Tunisian Bar Association, which began trying behind the scenes to resolve the entrenched stand-off between the political foes. From opponent to negotiating partner The negotiations in the autumn of 2013 dragged on for months, finally culminating in a compromise between government parties and the opposition. This compromise paved the way for a transition government, the adoption of the constitution and new elections. "Once, dialogue was really on the verge of breaking down," Abbassi recalls. He threatened a general strike to persuade everyone to give in, "because the other members of the quartet have no means of applying pressure." Under Abbassi's leadership, the Tunisian Labor Union Confederation has gone from adversary to negotiating partner. Abbassi is not afraid to intervene if he believes that his country is straying from its democratic course. "We are always being accused of sticking our nose into things that don't concern us. But we are merely intermediaries, we have no political ambitions," the father of four never tires of pointing out. Acting with reserve but determination, Abbassi has demonstrated great dedication, and is subject to frequent death threats as a result. Finding a way out of the impasse Tunisia's "National Dialogue Quartet" has received this year's Nobel Peace Prize Not affiliated to a political party, Abbassi was able to mediate between the various political stakeholders in the "National Dialogue" only because all those involved trust him. For hours, he listened to the positions of the various camps. "We kept reaching the point where someone would say to me: until here and no further, because we fear what the others will do. Of course I couldn't say that to the others," he said. "I had to keep some things to myself so that the dialogue could succeed." Even his fellow quartet members never found out all the details of the deals that were hashed out behind closed doors. When his mandate ends next year, Abbassi said he intends wants to write down everything that's not secret. He wants to convince future generations that dialogue is the only reasonable means for resolving conflicts. Abbassi said he is pleased that his achievements have now been crowned with the Nobel Peace Prize, but he nonetheless remains modest. "When we launched the dialogue, we never thought it would someday be rewarded in this way. What gratified us the most was to have led our country out of the crisis." The next hurdle to be overcome is the upcoming collective bargaining in the private sector. The labor union and employers' association have been struggling for weeks to reach a compromise - Nobel Prize or not. "We all recognized in 2013 that Tunisia was in danger and that we could only save the country by working together. But that doesn't mean we share the same views on other things," Abbassi said with a mischievous smile. He hopes, however, that in this case once again dialogue will bring about a solution. Translated from German by Jennifer Taylor This article originally appeared at Qantara.de - a joint project to promote dialogue with the Islamic world.


Tunisia's new constitution called inconsistent It has taken two years for the political parties in Tunisia to draft the country's new constitution. The resulting document , however, has been criticized for being inconsistent and contradictory. The exhaustion is plain to see on the faces of Tunisian parliamentarians. "It's like giving birth: painful, but in the end everyone is happy when the child arrives," said Mehrezia Laabidi, a member of Tunisia's Islamist political party Ennahda. As deputy chair of Tunisia's constituent assembly, she headed numerous plenary sessions over a period of several weeks, often having to raise her voice to restore order when the debate became too heated among the approximately 200 members. The National Assembly is due to vote on the proposed constitution on Sunday, January 26, after the original vote, scheduled for Saturday, was postponed. There is no denying that Tunisia's new constitution has had a very tumultuous birth, marked by bitter debates about religion, women's rights and the independence of the judiciary. But in the end, the conservative and liberal sides have managed to reconcile their differences, partly thanks to the conservative majority giving in on some issues. This consensus, however, has also created contradictions in the text. Religion stirs up controversy Laabidi led the difficult negotiations One of the key bones of contention throughout the process was the role of religion in modern Tunisia. While the preamble and Article 1 of the constitution mention Islam without defining its national significance, other passages are more succinct. Article 6, which was initially rejected and then approved following several alterations, guarantees religious freedom but also states that the government protects all that is "holy." For Amira Yahyaoui, president of Al Bawsala, an NGO devoted to monitoring local politics, this is the perfect example of the constitution's overall contradictory nature. "Religious freedom and the protection of holiness don't go together," she said. Another contradictory point is that the future president has to be Muslim. "This is a schizophrenic text that includes various statements and opposing statements in order to please everybody," commented constitutional lawyer Salwa Hamrouni, adding that the constitution will present a real challenge to the judges at the future constitutional court. Women's rights hotly debated Apart from the role of religion, Tunisians are anxious to see how the topic of gender equality will be presented in the new constitution. There were fears that that the new constitution would be a setback for Tunisian women, who were granted many rights in 1956, shortly after Tunisia achieved independence from France, including the right to vote and file for divorce. Doubts remain, despite repeated assurances by the Ennahda-led coalition that women's rights would not be diminished. Articles 20 and 45 of the new constitution can be seen as progressive in this area. They not only grant men and women an equal status but also stipulate that a certain number of seats in city and district governments must be given to women. The adoption of these articles prompted jubilation among many parliamentarians, some of whom broke into a spontaneous rendition of the national anthem. However, women's rights campaigners fear that other articles in the constitution can be misused for the purpose of limiting the newly won freedoms. For example, they warn that the "holy right to life" can be used to combat abortion. Both the right and left had to make compromises to reach an agreement Reservations about the outcome However, the uprisings that took place in Tunisia three years ago do reverberate in the new constitution. The country's poorer, rural regions are being empowered, and the president's and prime minister's roles are defined in a way that aims to prevent an autocratic takeover of power. Also, a newly formed constitutional court is to monitor the legitimacy of future laws. But, despite these measures, the response to the final draft - which is as polarized as Tunisian society itself - has been lukewarm. Both sides have been forced to make major concessions. Karima Souid, a member of the left-leaning Al-Massar (Social Democratic Path) party points out that the role of young people who were behind the protests three years ago has been marginalized. "Having to fight for the rights of women and young people in this day and age isn't normal - these rights should be something natural," she commented. "It shows that we don't all pursue the same social model." Souid hopes that the future parliament will reformulate the relevant regulations. This parliament, just like the next president, is to be elected sometime later this year. A transitional government under the leadership of former industry minister Mehdi Jomaa is due to take over at the start of next week. Prime Minister Ali Larayedh (Ennahda) announced his resignation in early January in order to put an end to the country's escalating political crisis, triggered by the murder of two opposition politicians.


Modern media is not always democratic Were the revolutions in the Arabic world started by social networks? Tunisian publicist Amel Grami is skeptical, and warns against the extremist potential of the new media. What is collectively known as "new media" promises individuals empowerment and the opportunity to share messages, ideas and approaches on the world wide web. It doesn't only receive, but can spread and communicate. In essence, it can do what people do. Which is why many are talking about the "democratization of communication." They say unimaginable new perspectives are emerging, allowing citizens to contribute to the shaping of a new world - all thanks to a political revolution triggered by new media. Some research concludes that the Arabian youth could not have spearheaded the political uprising without access to these new and highly efficient instruments. But that with them, the argument continues, they were able to shape change. Lebanese publicist Nadim Mansouri got it right when he said: "Facebook has achieved cult status in the Arab world and spread at a break-neck speed. Thanks to the possibilities it offers, users were able to reach their goals and mobilize the masses to bring down their repressive regimes." But opinions are divided on the role of this "new media" in the creation of democratic, revolutionary awareness. Besides the Facebook enthusiasts are those who highlight the importance of the collective experience of generations of political activists - which  they don't want to see swept under the carpet. Between the two poles is a broad spectrum of opinion, which after two years of Arab rebellion leads us to ask what role this new media really played in the revolutions, and to what extent it brought about lasting democratic awareness? As it would be hard to analyze the process of each recent revolution individually, I am going to restrict myself to the situation in Tunisia and the role of modern media within it. New media in the Tunisian revolution One thing is certain: Over the past years we have experienced a remarkable proliferation of political blogs, websites, internet forums, satellite programs and Facebook pages. Uploading videos to YouTube and sharing messages, images and information on Twitter was already gaining popularity before the revolution, and doubtless such platforms contributed to the notion that modern media was the driver behind the country's new-found political awareness. An awareness of the need to exchange exploitation and isolation for freedom, dignity and justice. Young people benefited from digital media, building solidarity and support networks where they could publish critical articles, comment on the latest events and co-ordinate their activities on the streets. This helped them to regain their self-confidence and see that they could influence, and even change reality. But there are many who disagree with the claims that social media networks were behind the success of the revolution. Political awareness, they would say, is not something that develops overnight, and moreover, to put the likes of Facebook and Twitter on a pedestal, is to ignore the hard work of generations of activists, and other forms of civil engagement. Fact is, on closer inspection the causes for the revolution are far more heterogeneous and complex, and it would be wrong to walk around with the idea that public opinion is formed solely by means of social networks. If we look at the development of the opposition movement in Tunisia, it is clear that civil rights activists have contributed to the growth of political awareness in many different ways. Although regimes of old tried to stop their activities, their tenacity made them role models, and gave hope to everyone holding out for a brighter tomorrow. The riots in which several workers were killed in a mining region of southern Tunisia five years ago are one such example. Despite the regime inevitably crushing the protests in a region largely isolated from the rest of the country, the incident left its mark on the nation as a whole. Poverty and marginalization meant very few in the region had no access to modern means of communication, and that the number of young people who recorded and shared the events online was very low. Nonetheless word about what was happening got around, and the will to stand up to the repressive regime was so strong that men and women braved the security forces to take to the streets. It is therefore only possible to understand the revolution from the perspective of an historical development which reflects the lifelong achievements of many Tunisians. They broke through the wall of fear and paid a high price for their resistance. And that is why we should reevaluate the status of new media. We shouldn't give it the leading role, but just one of many, because that is what it is. That said, it is doubtless a powerful tool, because it enabled those involved to clearly communicate their suffering and to expose Ben Ali's regime in front of the watching world. The other side of the coin To conclude, it is important to note that new media does not always represent democracy and freedom. Saudi Wahhabism, an ultra conservative branch of Sunni Islam, used satellite channels, websites, Facebook pages and video clips to make an appealing visual case for religious dogma. Such strategies are an assault. They cement ignorance and abuse religion. Rather than being used to promote a culture of scrutiny, criticism and the rule of law, many modern forms of media have become tools in efforts toward societal regression. And instead of contributing to a culture of human rights education, the establishment of peace and a fundamental change in the system of society and economic structures, such forms of media are accomplices in the manipulation of awareness and the stirring up of a marginalized youth for Jihadist activities. Amel Grami is Professor for Equality and Intercultural Studies at the Tunisian University in Manouba. She has written numerous books about women's rights and reforms in the Arab-speaking world.


Tunisians not content with lack of economic improvement after the revolution Tunisia was the first country to overthrow its dictatorship, helping spark uprisings throughout the Arab world. But today demonstrators are back in the streets, saying the new government hasn’t met their economic needs. Reese Erlich reports from the town where the uprising began, Sidi Bouzid, Tunisia. Report: Reese Erlich


'Tunisian Girl' blogs for freedom and democracy Lina Ben Mhenni's blog served as a key source of information on the crimes committed by the Ben Ali regime in Tunisia. After the dictator's fall, the 28-year-old kept tabs on Tunisia's progress toward democracy. Lina Ben Mhenni is always on the move - and always online. Whether it's at Tunis University, where she is an assistant professor, at international conferences, meeting with bloggers in cafes, or demonstrating in the street, she always carries a phone with a camera, a laptop and a mobile Internet connection. She is continually updating her status on Facebook and Twitter, posting pictures and commenting on articles and videos. Ben Mhenni is "A Tunisian Girl," a blog that won the 2011 Deutsche Welle International Blog Award (the BOBs) in June. A panel of jury members chose her for her work documenting abuses by former Tunisian President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali's regime and promoting democracy in the country. Revolution made by people People, not online networks, were behind the Tunisian uprising, she says During the protests that eventually ousted Ben Ali in January, the Internet was the only source of independent information. The protests were famously sparked when 26-year-old street vendor Mohamed Bouazizi set himself on fire in the town of Sidi Bouzid on December 17, 2010, after police said he didn't have the right permits to sell his goods. The incident was captured on video, a piece of footage that evaded a media blackout by being disseminated on Facebook and other Internet platforms. When hundreds of people gathered to protest at the local authority's building, the government reacted with a brutal repression. During the blackout, the Internet, Facebook, Twitter and Ben Mhenni's Arabic, French and English blog became one of the most important sources of information for Tunisians as well as people in the rest of the world. But Ben Mhenni said she doesn't believe the uprising that resulted was an "online revolution." "The revolution was made by people," she told Deutsche Welle. "By the people who were brutally beaten by security forces. By the people who took to the streets and risked their lives. And, most of all, by the people who had to pay with their lives." Documenting and remembering Ben Mhenni used her blog to keep the world informed Ben Mhenni risked her own life by braving numerous roadblocks to see the bodies of the people murdered in faraway Tunisian towns by pro-Ben Ali forces. She published her pictures of the victims on her blog to make sure the rest of the world also saw what was happening. "I will never be able to forget that moment," she said. "The picture of bullet wounds in a young man's corpse and the sorrow of his family and friends." More than 200 people died during the Tunisian uprising, according to the United Nations. For the 28-year-old blogger, the regime's sheer violence was the biggest reason it needed to be toppled. Risking arrest and torture Ben Mhenni joined protesters on the streets in Tunis "When I saw how people were being killed, it was clear to me that there was no going back," Ben Mhenni said. "Somehow I had to give these people and their families a voice so that their deaths would not be in vain." In addition to documenting the crimes committed by the regime, she joined protesters on the street and gave interviews, via Skype, to international media organizations reporting on events in Tunisia. Like other activists, she risked arrest and torture several times. Discovering the Internet Ben Mhenni's blogging career began in 2007 during studies in the US, after she discovered an article about blogging. Her first entries were simply personal journals, but her blog gradually became more critical of the Tunisian government, and she soon fell foul of the country's censors. All of her entries from 2007 to mid-2009 were blocked. She countered by linking her content on as many Internet platforms as possible, in an attempt to evade state media controls. She says she was occasionally followed by the secret police during that time. Vigilance continues Her work seems to have paid off, now that Ben Ali's regime has been toppled, but she insists that the struggle for a democratic Tunisia and a just society continues. She has a scathing take on mainstream media outlets. "The journalists still follow the same strategy as before," she says. "They are loyal to the strongest, the ones making decisions. The Tunisian press is neither independent or unbiased to this day." She also complains that young people, who she credits as sparking and carrying the revolution, are not being allowed to participate in the new government. That is why her blog still documents injustices, and still publicizes new protests, when necessary. Ben Mhenni was one of the favorites for this year's Nobel Peace Prize, but she says she was relieved when it was given to three other female human rights activists. "I spent a horrific week in the limelight. I long for my normal life," she wrote on Facebook at the time. "Now the fight can continue." Much has happened in Tunisia since the early days of the Jasmine Revolution. Ben Ali has been sentenced to 35 years in jail, and the first free elections have taken place. But Ben Mhenni is still blogging - about problems still lingering in Tunisian society, but also about mothers who lost their sons in the revolution, and about a past that still needs to be understood. Author: Chamselassil Ayari / sms Editor: Stuart Tiffen


Sounds of the Arab Spring at Beethovenfest The Arab Spring has changed the Middle East in many ways - and had on effect on the lives of musicians. Six composers from Arab countries met at the Beethovenfest to explore the impact of the revolution. "I'll just google the Arab Spring," says actor Laurenz Leky, who tonight is playing the role of an interested artist. On December 17, 2010, the revolution began in Tunisia, he tells the audience. To protest random police violence, a vegetable seller set himself on fire and unleashed the first mass demonstration. Corresponding video footage can be seen on the screen behind Leky. Hope for the Arab Spring "What does 'Arab Spring' mean and how can we navigate through the overload of information to learn more about it?" For Turkish pianist Seda Röder, that is a central question during the multimedia piano evening titled "Songs of Spring," which was held during the Beethovenfest in the composer's birthplace, Bonn. This year's music festival is being held under the motto "Revolutions." Seda Röder Plays new music from the Arab world "I didn't want to look back, at history, but rather to the future," says Röder. That's why she found six musicians from five Arab countries that have composed works about what the Arab Spring, the "Arabellion" means to them. The works of the two Tunisian composers, Nidhal Jebali and Souhaly Guesmi - both in their early 20s - convey a lightness. "They are young and hopeful," says Röder. They don't carry the bitterness of the past, she adds. Tunisia is the only country in which the so-called revolution led to a new democratic constitution. But are Tunisians even part of the Arab world? Actor Laurenz Leky googles again. When he enters the word "Are Tunisians…" Google suggests a search question: "Are Tunisians good in bed?" The role of social media By this point it's clear that Seda Röder, who was involved in planning the program for this multimedia evening, is not just interested in showing various facets of the Arab Spring. She poses another critical question: How do we inform ourselves in the digital age? "Information that we access via search engines or social networks is modified according to our behavior. We hardly receive any information that hasn't been filtered," she says. The crowd gathered to mark the fifth anniversary of the Arab Spring; the vegetable seller who set himself on fire can be seen on the poster Amr Okba from Egypt composed a work for piano, called "F.B.I. Facebook Information," that takes up this point. The melody keeps coming to a halt and elements of the US national anthem break through with increasing clarity. His hope has been extinguished, he told Seda Röder, who worked closely with the six participating composers. The role of the Americans in the Arab Spring is something Okba criticizes just as strongly as the information that's distributed via Facebook. Hidden protests Social networks are both a curse and a blessing. Seda Röder used Google and her Facebook network to contact the six composers, some of whom had taught themselves or took music lessons via Skype. That's how she reached Hasan Hujairi from Bahrain, who speaks to the audience in Bonn via Skype. "As an artist you're not allowed to talk about politics, religion or gender issues," he says, adding that the people had found a different language. They honk their car horns to a particular rhythm as a sign of protest, or they go to the roofs of their homes every night at a particular time and shout. "The police have banned honking," says Hasan Hujairi.  The voices of protest on the roofs, however, could not be localized. "I integrated these sounds into my compositions." The honking rhythm, which Seda Röder pounds onto the piano lid, is one example. Suffering during the war in Syria Images from the war in Syria then appear on the screen on stage. They have been compiled by Austrian media artist Tobias Hammerle: bombed houses, politicians giving speeches, people fleeing. At the end, there is a handshake in which one of the hands is that of a skeleton. As complex as the war is, so is the music by Syrian artist Zaid Jabri. "Outside of his country, Zaid has become a superstar of modern music," says Röder. The South African poet Yvette Christianse wrote the text for his chamber music piece, "Variations on (R)evolution" - a text about the suffering and pain of war. It is sung by soprano Kristina Quintabà, who is accompanied by violinist Ekkehard Windrich. Police used tear gas against demonstrators who marked the fifth anniversary of the so-called revolution in Bahrain Just after their performance, Seda Röder herself appears on screen. "What's it like in your country, Turkey?" asks actor Laurenz Leky. But Seda Röder isn't able to answer. The speakers have been turned off and then the picture disappears entirely. "After the Gezi Park movement, everyone thought that something would happen, but the opposite was the case," says Röder. Particularly after the recent coup attempt in July, criticism of the government was not tolerated and many have been sent to prison, including some of her friends. "Erdogan has turned citizens into civilian police, into spies. No one dares to say anything any more," she says. Arab composers abroad Turkish composer Togoa Yayalar, a friend of Röder's, dealt with the Gezi Park demonstrations in his work, including the sounds of whispering voices and scurrying feet. After his studies in Boston, he returned to Turkey in order to train other classical composers, which is currently not an easy undertaking in Turkey. Most composers live abroad - including Röder, who has made Austria her second home. The Gezi Park protests in Turkey failed to bring about change "Making music in these countries is difficult and risky," she says. During the summer, Seda Röder traveled to Turkey. "For the last time, for now," she says, clearly emotional. Like other musicians, she has also received death threats. For her, it's become all the more important to introduce young Arab composers to the European audiences. "It sounds banal," says Röder, "but music connects people."


How the Arab Spring spawned a ‘green revolution’ The Arab Spring sparked a series of protests across the Mideast not just for political change but also for more environment protection. In countries like Tunisia, citizens are taking action to conserve biodiversity. Ichkeul is the last remaining lake in a chain formerly extending across North Africa. Civil society groups are working with government and international organizations to conserve the rich biodiversity at this heritage site The parks weren’t just hard to access for visitors. Local residents too felt shut out of the negotiations that lay the foundation of the national parks some 20 years ago. As a result, many found themselves grappling with radically altered lives and livelihoods without having been consulted.   "This protected area took a large part of the grazing ground that used to be for the local community," Mahjoub says. "After the revolution, some entered protected areas to say the land had previously belonged to them.”   He adds that the revolution taught people to demand change and involvement, not just in political and social issues but also on the environment front. And, the demands have translated to actual involvement - after January 2011, over 370 non-governmental organizations were created in the field of environment protection alone.   "We are seeing this new era where it is not the public administration spearheading the projects, but civil societies as entities with more flexibility of movement, and physical presence in the ground," Majoub points out.   Activism translating into conservation efforts   It’s still too early to tell whether increased civil society participation has resulted in better protection for the country’s biodiversity.   But there are definitely gains, Mahjoub says, that are not specifically confined to Tunisia. For instance, there is a coordination of efforts into data collection, such as on migratory birds coming to Algeria or Morocco that previously didn't use to, or research into wetlands.   "I think now we have an idea, more precise and more updated about the current environment in our countries,” he said. “What they (civil society) are doing is very useful, because there is a lot of data that would not be available without them.”   Policymakers have also caught up, as evidenced by the newly-adopted Tunisian National Strategy for the Development and Sustainable Management of Forests and Rangelands.   Political instability is bad news for environment   Tunisia may have made some progress on green issues. But anyone who has been following the events of the Arab Spring knows the country is something of an outlier. Elsewhere, such as in Egypt, the revolution outcome has not been as peaceful. As recently as last month, more than 1,000 protestors took to the streets again to protest #link:http://www.dw.de/protests-break-out-in-cairo-following-mubarak-acquittal/a-18102035:charges being dropped against former President Hosni Mubarak# for 239 deaths during Egypt's Arab Spring. Pollution and mismanagement of natural resources on top of social and political injustices prompted Egyptians to take to the streets in protest The Nile River is perhaps the best known biodiversity hotspot in North Africa. It includes highly productive wetland ecosystems, as well as a rich variety of fish, mammal and bird species In the fight for a better future, many in Tunisia included environmental issues in the push for societal change. In other countries, the revolutions turned into a drawn-out, bloody affair, that put the environmental agenda on the back burner, as the countries battled with internal strife.   In Libya for example, "absolutely nothing" is happening by way of biodiversity conservation at all, Klaimi says.   Cross-border efforts have also been difficult to coordinate, as alliances and divisions prove a hurdle. "Going to, say, Dubai is now more difficult for Syrians, Egyptians and Libyans, even as development staff and government officials," she says. "Their participation in workshops, meetings and conferences has also declined."


Tunisians open their doors for Libyan refugees More than half a million people have fled from Libya to Tunisia since February. But only a few hundred are actually staying in camps. In Tunisia's southern region of Tataouine, tens of thousands are hosted by locals. As Fauzia is throwing green peppers into a frying pan, Fathia is preparing the rest of dinner. The two young women bond over some kitchen talk. They could easily pass for sisters. "We eat together, we share everything, like one family," says Fathia's mother, Messouda. She's careful not to use the word 'refugee' when she talks about her guests. Tunisians lined up to offer their help when the Libyan refugees crossed the border, recall those who needed help at the time. Fauzia's father Ali is setting up the rug and cushions he brought from the family home in Libya outside Messouda's house in the small courtyard. It's one of the few things he packed in the car before the family fled across the border. Ali and his wife, daughter and his two younger sons left Libya in early May, after rockets landed close by their house. At the border town, Tunisian families were ready and waiting. They supplied the refugees from the neighboring country with food, clothes and cash, Fauzia's father Ali recalls. "They opened their hearts. Then they opened their doors. And they've never asked for a dime. You couldn't find that in Libya." Until the war is over - whenever that is  Sharing meals and a home Ali's Tunisian host, Messouda, is a retired widow who made a living as a cleaning lady. She lives with her elderly mother and her daughter in the same house where she was born, in the outskirts of Tataouine. Wealthier Libyans can rent houses or even villas in Tunisian towns along the coast. But others don't have that option, and have to sleep rough. Messouda's decision was clear: She will put up Ali's family until the war is over, whenever that is. This household is hardly an exception around here. Tunisia - long ruled by an authoritarian regime itself - has become the country of shelter for many Libyans since February. Migrant workers, asylum seekers and more than 200,000 Libyan refugees have escaped the violence so far. Around 30,000 Libyan refugees are living with locals around Tataouine, one of Tunisia's poorest regions. Fauzia's family is one of them. Such an outpouring of generosity is one for the books, says Kamel Deriche with the UN Refugee Agency. "Imagine if we had to deal with 20, 30, 50 thousand Libyan refugees stranded in camps. It would have been a really difficult situation to handle with the harsh weather conditions here." The UNHCR's mission here has become a lot easier, he says, simply because many Tunisian families with very little means themselves opened their doors. Reward unparalleled generosity The UNHCR wants to help host families and has begun paying part of their gas and water bills. The families can also count on the help of homegrown goodwill organizations. Dozens of charities have sprouted up over the past couple of months, such as Ihsen. The organization feeds up to 20,000 Libyan refugees every day.  Bread distribution in Tataouine  Their food pantry is located in what used to be an outlet of Abdesslem Bengueid's furniture business. Rolled up carpets are still lying around cardboard boxes full of cans of tomato paste and quince jam. Bengueid owns several stores - in April, his Tataouine outlet became a place where teenage volunteers now bag crunchy baguettes. Each family gets about half a dozen a day. On average, they have six or seven children to feed. Bengueid started his charity with 4,000 dollars of his own money. Now, most of the funding comes from Bengueid's business connections in Kuwait, where he worked for 15 years. The rest is provided by Tunisian farmers and small donors. Mahmoud, a volunteer, is proud that locals have organized themselves on their own. "Under Ben Ali this wouldn't have been possible," he says. Mahmoud explains that under the authoritarian president who the Tunisians ousted in January, only the state could run charities and government officials would steal most of the money. Time for sharing Mahmoud hopes Ihsen will turn to helping destitute Tunisians once the Libyans go home. But will the charity make it through the summer? Three similar food banks in Tataouine ran out of cash and shut down over the past few weeks. With Ramadan coming up in August, Mahmoud says, the price of fresh vegetables, a staple of fast-breaking meals, will likely soar, and supplies dwindle. Ramadan is also a time when people go the extra mile to help others. Mahmoud hopes Tunisians and Libyans will keep sharing whatever is on their plate. Author: Marine Olivesi (nh) Editor: Sarah Steffen


Tunisian police use tear gas as hard-line Muslims protest movie Tunisian police have used tear gas on hard-line Muslim demonstrators angry at the airing of a film on national television. The protesters claim the movie Persepolis, which depicts God, is insulting to their religion. Tunisian police used tear gas on Friday to disperse thousands of protesters angry at the broadcast of an animated film that Islamists claim is blasphemous. 
Police stopped the marchers as they headed toward the Nessma TV station, which showed the movie Persepolis earlier in the week. 
A group of some 100 people went on to attack the home of Tunisian television station owner Nabil Karoui with firebombs later in the day. Karoui, who has apologized for the airing of the animation calling it a "mistake," was not at home at the time of the attack. 
Demonstrations against the broadcast come ahead of an election on October 23 for a new constitutional body for the country. 

Sermon precedes protests 
The protests began after Friday prayers, during which an imam at the capital Tunis's al-Fatah mosque preached against the film, claiming it was "a serious attack on the religious beliefs of Muslims." 
The movie, which won a jury prize at the 2007 Cannes Film Festival, is Marjane Satrapi's adaptation of her own graphic novels, about growing up during Iran's Islamic Revolution, and contains a scene with a character representing God. Depictions of God are considered sacrilegious in Islam. 
Since the largely secular regime of former President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali was overthrown in January, there have been reports of a rise in the number of attacks against perceived symbols of secularism by hard-line conservative Muslims, known as Salafists, in the country. 
Author: Richard Connor (AFP, AP) Editor: Nicole Goebel Police stopped the marchers as they headed toward the Nessma TV station, which showed the movie Persepolis earlier in the week. 
A group of some 100 people went on to attack the home of Tunisian television station owner Nabil Karoui with firebombs later in the day. Karoui, who has apologized for the airing of the animation calling it a "mistake," was not at home at the time of the attack. 
Demonstrations against the broadcast come ahead of an election on October 23 for a new constitutional body for the country. 

Sermon precedes protests 
The protests began after Friday prayers, during which an imam at the capital Tunis's al-Fatah mosque preached against the film, claiming it was "a serious attack on the religious beliefs of Muslims." 
The movie, which won a jury prize at the 2007 Cannes Film Festival, is Marjane Satrapi's adaptation of her own graphic novels, about growing up during Iran's Islamic Revolution, and contains a scene with a character representing God. Depictions of God are considered sacrilegious in Islam. 
Since the largely secular regime of former President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali was overthrown in January, there have been reports of a rise in the number of attacks against perceived symbols of secularism by hard-line conservative Muslims, known as Salafists, in the country. 
Author: Richard Connor (AFP, AP) Editor: Nicole Goebel A group of some 100 people went on to attack the home of Tunisian television station owner Nabil Karoui with firebombs later in the day. Karoui, who has apologized for the airing of the animation calling it a "mistake," was not at home at the time of the attack. 
Demonstrations against the broadcast come ahead of an election on October 23 for a new constitutional body for the country. 

Sermon precedes protests 
The protests began after Friday prayers, during which an imam at the capital Tunis's al-Fatah mosque preached against the film, claiming it was "a serious attack on the religious beliefs of Muslims." 
The movie, which won a jury prize at the 2007 Cannes Film Festival, is Marjane Satrapi's adaptation of her own graphic novels, about growing up during Iran's Islamic Revolution, and contains a scene with a character representing God. Depictions of God are considered sacrilegious in Islam. 
Since the largely secular regime of former President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali was overthrown in January, there have been reports of a rise in the number of attacks against perceived symbols of secularism by hard-line conservative Muslims, known as Salafists, in the country. 
Author: Richard Connor (AFP, AP) Editor: Nicole Goebel Demonstrations against the broadcast come ahead of an election on October 23 for a new constitutional body for the country. 

Sermon precedes protests 
The protests began after Friday prayers, during which an imam at the capital Tunis's al-Fatah mosque preached against the film, claiming it was "a serious attack on the religious beliefs of Muslims." 
The movie, which won a jury prize at the 2007 Cannes Film Festival, is Marjane Satrapi's adaptation of her own graphic novels, about growing up during Iran's Islamic Revolution, and contains a scene with a character representing God. Depictions of God are considered sacrilegious in Islam. 
Since the largely secular regime of former President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali was overthrown in January, there have been reports of a rise in the number of attacks against perceived symbols of secularism by hard-line conservative Muslims, known as Salafists, in the country. 
Author: Richard Connor (AFP, AP) Editor: Nicole Goebel Sermon precedes protests 
The protests began after Friday prayers, during which an imam at the capital Tunis's al-Fatah mosque preached against the film, claiming it was "a serious attack on the religious beliefs of Muslims." 
The movie, which won a jury prize at the 2007 Cannes Film Festival, is Marjane Satrapi's adaptation of her own graphic novels, about growing up during Iran's Islamic Revolution, and contains a scene with a character representing God. Depictions of God are considered sacrilegious in Islam. 
Since the largely secular regime of former President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali was overthrown in January, there have been reports of a rise in the number of attacks against perceived symbols of secularism by hard-line conservative Muslims, known as Salafists, in the country. 
Author: Richard Connor (AFP, AP) Editor: Nicole Goebel The protests began after Friday prayers, during which an imam at the capital Tunis's al-Fatah mosque preached against the film, claiming it was "a serious attack on the religious beliefs of Muslims." 
The movie, which won a jury prize at the 2007 Cannes Film Festival, is Marjane Satrapi's adaptation of her own graphic novels, about growing up during Iran's Islamic Revolution, and contains a scene with a character representing God. Depictions of God are considered sacrilegious in Islam. 
Since the largely secular regime of former President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali was overthrown in January, there have been reports of a rise in the number of attacks against perceived symbols of secularism by hard-line conservative Muslims, known as Salafists, in the country. 
Author: Richard Connor (AFP, AP) Editor: Nicole Goebel The movie, which won a jury prize at the 2007 Cannes Film Festival, is Marjane Satrapi's adaptation of her own graphic novels, about growing up during Iran's Islamic Revolution, and contains a scene with a character representing God. Depictions of God are considered sacrilegious in Islam. 
Since the largely secular regime of former President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali was overthrown in January, there have been reports of a rise in the number of attacks against perceived symbols of secularism by hard-line conservative Muslims, known as Salafists, in the country. 
Author: Richard Connor (AFP, AP) Editor: Nicole Goebel Since the largely secular regime of former President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali was overthrown in January, there have been reports of a rise in the number of attacks against perceived symbols of secularism by hard-line conservative Muslims, known as Salafists, in the country. 
Author: Richard Connor (AFP, AP) Editor: Nicole Goebel Author: Richard Connor (AFP, AP) Editor: Nicole Goebel


Two years after the spark of the revolution, Tunisians feel mixed about the results Two years ago this week, the events known as the Arab spring began in Tunisia. The fall of President Ben Ali’s regime was greeted with euphoria not just in his own country, but around the world. But have the expectations and hopes people had of two years ago been fulfilled? And how is a fragile democracy made more stable?


Events in Egypt cause tension in Tunisia Tunisians are regarding events in Egypt with a mixture of fear and admiration. The government is afraid that it could come under pressure too, while the opposition has been lifted. It's Friday afternoon. A few dozen demonstrators have gathered in front of the Egyptian embassy in Tunis. These days the building is even more heavily guarded than usual. They have come to voice their support for Egypt's ousted president, Mohammed Morsi. Most of the protesters are indeed Egyptian, but a few Tunisians have joined them, demanding the overthrow of the military. One of them is Mehdi. What happened in Egypt, he says, was a coup, but it couldn't happen here, in his own country. "Those Tamarrod people have no business here. Everything will be good if God wills it," he says, before adding that unlike in Egypt, Tunisians respect the legitimacy of its elections. Protesters have come out in support of Morsi in Tunis Watching the crowd from a distance is elementary school teacher Mohammed. He says he can only shake his head in disbelief that people still choose to defend Morsi - and hopes the protest waves will soon reach Tunisia. "Egypt has finally had its revolution - the first one wasn't a real one." He is convinced it will soon happen in Tunisia. "Political Islam has failed," he says. "The Islamists have not implemented any political reforms. They haven't tackled any problems." Now, he argues, the population will wake up and see that there are only empty words behind it, and that religion won't feed them. Mohammed wants to see a clear division between religion and state - though the freedom of religion must still be guaranteed. Marzouki wants consensus Meanwhile, Ennahdha, the largest party in the government coalition is locked in a tense silence. The magic word is the legitimacy of the urns - even if the ones in Egypt have not helped much. Members of the government have routinely condemned events in Egypt, and made assurances that this would never happen in the country that sparked the so-called Arab Spring. Tunisian President Moncef Marzouki repeated this message at the recent visit by his French counterpart Francois Hollande. "I would have liked to see the Egyptians arrive at a political consensus," he declared before condemning the interference of the army. Marzouki (right) promised that Egyptian events would not be repeated in Tunisia "In Tunisia we must not allow ourselves to be divided by ideology," Marzouki said. "The so-called Islamists and laicists must find a political consensus. We are always open for dialogue." He then went on to promise elections and the passing of a constitution within the next six months. Unity government as a solution? In the meantime, the Tunisian opposition parties have been buoyed by developments in Egypt, calling with more urgency than usual for a new political direction. Nidaa Tounes, the movement around 86-year-old former interim Prime Minister Beji Caid Essebsi, is defending Morsi's ouster and is calling for the dissolution of the constituent assembly. This has been sitting since October 2011, when it was meant to agree a new constitution for the nation of 10 million people within a year. Meanwhile, the Popular Front, an alliance of communist and other left-wing parties, is calling for the wholesale removal of government representatives. This group, the third largest political force in Tunisia according to polls, considers the military's seizure of power in Egypt as justified, and claims that Ennahdha has betrayed the aims of the revolution. In order to achieve concrete results as quickly as possible, they are calling for a commission of experts to finish writing the constitution, followed by the formation of a national unity government to lead the country out of its economic crisis.


Africa on the Move - Tunisian Rap in Times of Revolution In December of 2010 one of Tunisia's best-known rappers, Hamada Ben-Amor, was detained for days for recording a song critical of the government.


Despite extremism, Djerba is model of integration The Tunisian island of Djerba is a role model in terms of a peaceful co-existance between Jews, Christians and Muslims - in a region torn by religious extremism. Kristen McTighe reports from Djerba. Mezuzahs are hung on doorways and young boys wearing kippahs linger on the corners of dusty neighborhood streets. Women in long skirts and scarves covering their hair walk past kosher butcher shops strewn with Hebrew signs. Here in this isolated enclave in the middle of the Muslim world, is the Hara Kabira, the largest of two Jewish neighborhoods on the southern Tunisian island of Djerba, where Jews, Christians and Muslims peacefully live and work side by side. The community has weathered the tumult that shook the region following the creation of Israel in 1948 and the changes that altered the region after the 2011 revolutions. Now, as attention has focused on a rising tide of extremism that has engulfed the region, the community says it is intent on staying. "By the grace of God, the Jews can live here and we can grow," says Youssef Oezen, the president of the Jewish community in Djerba. Numbering around 5,000 in 1948, the Jewish population of Djerba - which traces its origins back to the Babylonian exile of 586 BC - dropped to less than 700 by the middle of the 1990s. But over the past two decades, the population once again began to slowly grow. Today, around 1,100 Jews live on the island, according to Oezen, and with nearly half under 20 years old, in a deeply conservative community where having large families is the norm, he is firm in his belief that they will continue to grow. An image of tolerance Under the rule of former President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali, a secular autocrat who sought close ties with the west, the government was keen to protect the community and preserve a image of tolerance. With its turquoise waters and pristine sandy beaches, that image has been a tourism magnet. "We mix, we respect each other, it's just what's normal," said Madji Barouni, a Muslim from Djerba, as he stands in a jewellry shop in the old market of Houmt Souk, Djerba's largest town. Avi Bittan, the shop's Jewish owner, examines a watch Barouni brought in for repair. During the day, Jewish men work alongside Muslim and Christian neighbors as merchants in Houmt Souk, selling gold and silver jewellery, textiles and souvenirs. "There are no problems," Barouni told DW, as the Muslim call to prayer sounds from a nearby mosque. Jews are happy to integrate but enjoy the privacy of their community While they enjoy friendly and cordial relations with other residents of the island, when work is over, most Jews return home, keeping an insular life in their community. For Jewish leaders, it is a way to protect traditions and resist assimilation. While the small community has endured, it has not evaded all the tumult that has hit the region over the past six decades. In 2002, a truck filled with propane gas drove past security barriers at the El Ghriba synagogue and detonated in front of the holy site whose foundation is storied to have been laid using a stone carried by Cohens from Solomon's temple. Nearly two dozen people, mainly German tourists, were killed in the attack claimed by al Qaeda. Fear of persecution When Tunisians rose up in 2011 to oust Ben Ali and Islamists ascended to power in the first free and fair elections, fears once again arose that Tunisian Jews risked persecution. In the aftermath of the uprising, multiple Jewish cemeteries were reportedly defiled and several anti-Jewish incidents were reported. Permalink http://p.dw.com/p/1IQ3p But in one of his first moves after rising to power, Rashid Al-Ghannoushi, the head of Nahda, Tunisia's leading Islamist party, sent a delegation to the Jews in Djerba in an effort to reassure the community they would be protected. Today, the government's efforts to protect the Jews of Djerba are in plain sight. Police are stationed at entrances of the Hara Kabira to monitor who comes in and out and security checkpoints are scattered throughout the neighborhood. These efforts could prove more important than ever. Labeled the only success of the Arab Spring, Tunisia has been rattled by a dangerous rise in extremism over the past few years. Last year, militants carried out two deadly attacks on Western tourists, one in March at the Bardo Museum in Tunis, and another in June at the beach resort of Sousse where 38 people were killed, mostly British tourists. And in March, mostly Tunisian militants entering from Libya stormed the nearby border town of Ben Gardane and launched a bloody raid on police and army. The assault, which left more than 50 dead, validated fears that a spillover from Libya, where Islamic State militants have gained a foothold, had begun. When the attacks broke out, access to the island was immediately cut off. Economic pain "We were a little scared, that's normal, but everyone was scared, not just the Jews," Nissan Bittan, a Jewish goldsmith, told DW. "But I think things are better now." Like many residents of the island, the greatest concern for Bittan is now the economy, which has been ravaged by last years attacks. And with the annual pilgrimage to the El Ghriba Synagogue taking place this week - a time of year that sees a surge in tourism with Jewish pilgrims from Israel, France and beyond making the journey - those security fears could deal business another big blow. Security concerns have put off many tourists but locals say they're not afraid The pilgrimage, was canceled in 2011 following the revolution amid security fears. Celebrations resumed the next year and the government beefed up security, but visitor numbers have remained low. Ahead of this year's pilgrimage, Israel's National Security Council Counter-Terrorism Bureau issued a travel warning for Tunisia but for most of the island's residents, it has not changed their sense of security. Back in his jewelry shop, Avi Bittan is asked if the extremism that has rattled the region has made him feel unsafe. "No, no, no, never. Look on the streets, we know everyone here," said Bittan, adamantly, perplexed that anyone would think otherwise. Barouni, meanwhile, says he and other Muslims here would not hesitate to protect their Jewish neighbors. "We are all Tunisians."


On the campaign trail, a Tunisian in Germany pushes for change at home On Sunday, Tunisians head to polling booths to elect an assembly given the historic task of drafting a post-revolution constitution. Tunisians abroad may also stand, with a 24-year-old student from Bonn in the running. Tunisia is slowly on the recovery trail after a revolution earlier this year led to the downfall of its dictatorial leader and sparked similar revolts around the Arab world. On Sunday, the country will head to the polls to elect an assembly to decide on a new constitution - and Tunisians the world over will partake in the process, with delegations from countries around Europe invited to get involved. In Germany, home to a large Tunisian expatriate population, one delegate will be chosen from 15 candidates who have put themselves up for election to the constitutional assembly. The only woman among them is Amal Nasr, a 24-year-old art history student who lives in the western city of Bonn. "There are 80,000 Tunisians who live here in Germany and they can all vote for me," Amal says while standing in one of Bonn's busiest shopping areas. The sun is shining today, and Amal's outlook is equally full of promise. Bonn is home to a significant Tunisian population and the city still hosts the Tunisian Consulate General from back when it was the capital of West Germany. The major problem Amal faces, however, is identifying Tunisians on the streets and motivating them to play a part in the future of their homeland. Coalition for democracy  Ben Ali fled to Saudi Arabia and was sentenced to more than 30 years in absentia Amal and her colleagues are running under the flag of a Tunisian political group called the Democratic Modernist Pole (PDM) - an alliance of parties vying for influence in post-revolution Tunisia. "We are social democrats and we are a grouping on the left," she says. "There are many parties that exist within this spectrum, and it's quite representative of Tunisia at the moment. There are 114 parties in all and so it's normal for many of them to resemble one another." The PDM was set up to challenge Islamist groups and former loyalists of ousted leader Zine El Abidine Ben Ali, who ruled Tunisia for 23 years before fleeing at the start of this year amid a nationwide revolt. The center-left coalition wants a Tunisia with Islam as the religion, but with religious freedom and a separation of faith and politics. The coalition has registered itself for Sunday's election, when Tunisians will select the more than 200 people who will draft a new constitution for the country. The Democratic Modernists are only winning around 2 percent in the opinion polls back home, but Amal says opinion polls in her country aren't as reliable as those in Europe. "You have to be careful with opinion polls, which unfortunately are not neutral in Tunisia, where they're often prepared to order, so to speak. A party actually orders an opinion poll," she says. Nasr set her stall in the middle of a Bonn pedestrian zone Democratic alliance The moderate Islamist Ennahda (Renaissance) Party is expected to take the biggest block of votes in the Muslim majority country, and it's also putting up a candidate in Germany. It's projected to get around 25 percent of the vote, but Amal points out that this still isn't a majority. She says Tunisia needs a coalition of democratic forces to enshrine equality in the country's new constitution. "I just hope that everyone respects the freedoms of others. If a woman wants to wear a headscarf then that's her decision. If not, then that's also her decision," she says. Of all the Arab countries to have recently undergone revolutions, Tunisia is perhaps best placed to achieve a peaceful outcome sooner rather than later, says Amal. "In other countries it's much more complicated. There are, for example, the Berbers in Algeria and Morocco, there are the Copts in Egypt, while in Libya the tribes still play a big role," she says. Nearing the end of her studies at the University of Bonn, Amal says she wants to eventually return to Tunisia to help the work of young artists - or, perhaps, even take part in the historic act of writing Tunisia's new constitution. "You can't find democracy in a cereal packet. It's a learning process. I just hope we'll prove to be good students." Author: Michael Gessat / dfm Editor: Martin Kuebler


Tunisia MPs OK post-revolution government led by Nidaa Tounes party Tunisia has approved a government led by the secular Nidaa Tounes and including Islamist rivals. The parliament's vote comes after landmark free elections last fall in the birthplace of the Arab revolutions of 2011. Tunisian parliament speaker Mohamed Ennaceur welcomed what he called "a comfortable majority" in Thursday's vote of confidence. Out of 204 MPs who attended the session of the 217-member parliament, 166 voted in favor of the government, 30 against and eight abstained. Before the vote, Prime Minister Habib Essid withdrew an earlier list of ministers that had excluded the moderate Islamist faction Ennahda and given all posts to members of his nationalist Nidaa Tounes party. The prime minister presented his adjusted program to parliament Wednesday, focusing on securing the country against terrorist threats and controlling runaway inflation. "The motto of this government will be work, then work, and nothing other than work," pledged Essid, an independent. Nidaa Tounes, the winner of parliamentary elections last October, holds six portfolios in the new government, including the finance and foreign affairs ministries. The party also won the presidential runoff in December, and saw Beji Caid Essebsi inaugurated at the end of the year. The interior, defense and justice departments go to independents. Ennahda will take the Labor Ministry and three secretary of state posts. The leftist Popular Front, which opposed any Islamist participation in the government, voted against Essid on Thursday, and will likely form the main opposition in parliament. Positive milestone The Cabinet replaces Mehdi Jomaa's interim technocratic government, in power for just over a year after an Ennahda-led coalition stepped down in a bid to end a 2013 standoff sparked by angry demonstrations in response to the assassinations of two leftist politicians. The protests had led to fears that Tunisia's nascent democracy might head toward the instability that has hit other post-revolution Arab states. Tunisians overthrew the autocrat Zine El Abidine Ben Ali in 2011, following protests that began in 2010, the first in what became a transnational populist revolution in many Arab countries. Similar uprisings in Syria, Yemen and neighboring Libya have all led to conflict, while Egypt saw an Islamist president, Mohammed Morsi, elected and deposed by the army within a year. Following the overthrow of Ben Ali, Tunisia saw four years of stormy transition as the country's political establishment adjusted to life without the strongman. The assembly that approved the government on Thursday is the first elected under the country's new democratic constitution. mkg/kms (Reuters, AFP, dpa, AP)





Clock is ticking on new Tunisian government New jobs, discipline and national unity - according to Tunisia's new head of government, Ali Larayedh, this is what the country needs. But time is quickly running out. The new Tunisian government is only meant to stay for a year. After that, the country is to have fresh elections. But observers say that the months of policy-making in between will be decisive: is Tunisia going to set sails for the Turkish model and transform itself into a modern state with a liberal economy and a Muslim value system? Or will the country sink back into anarchy and violence, as a refuge for Islamist extremists? That would be a fragile state for a direct neighbour to Europe? Slow changes and a situation that deteriorates "Our political leadership is losing too much time," says Kamal Ben Younes, editor in chief of the daily newspaper Assabah and director of the new TV news station Al Janubia. His criticism: "They are always looking for a compromise." The new government is meant to set things right quickly before time runs out. Unemployment figures remain high, food prices keep going up, and tourists continue to stay away - the country is on a steep economic decline. At the same time, mistrust and tension are on the rise, as secular and religious groups are caught in an uncompromising standoff. Al-Jurshi: "The Tunisian state has remained weak until today." But it's the Salafists who are gaining ground. Under the dictatorship of Ben Ali they were persecuted, and many of their followers disappeared behind bars. The revolution set them free again, and even though there are no exact figures, it appears that their numbers are increasing rapidly. The increase is due to the wide-spread disappointment with the status quo, says journalist Salaheedin al-Jurshi. "Immediately following the revolution, the Tunisian state was weak - and it has remained so until today," he told DW. "That has been exploited by agents from abroad, to support extremists within the country and weaken the moderate forces." Some believe that Salafist groups in Tunisia receive funding from Saudi Arabia. Influences from abroad A stable government is important for the country not to become a pawn of its Arab neighbors - some of whom propagate a very conservative, Wahabist version of Islam. "Those revolutions in the Arab world have turned the order in the whole region upside down," al-Jurshi said. “That's why, after the fall of the dictators, some players very actively try to influence the succession issue - to strengthen conservative-Muslim forces and weaken liberal ones." These developments could have devastating effects on a country like Tunisia, which for years had a reputation of being open-minded and modern. The strongest blow for recent developments was the murder of the high-ranking secular opposition member Chokri Belaid in early February. All sides agree that the circumstances of this politically motivated murder remain unknown. For Suad Abdelrahim of the Ennahda party the act meant a turning point. "It was obvious: We now have to agree on a schedule immediately - a clear-cut plan that tells us what project has to be finished when,” he said. “That's why I also believe that we will finish drafting the constitution rather quickly now." The murder of leading oposition figure Chokri Belaid has caused the biggest riots since the revolution Three tasks: security, economy, political order A clear schedule that is rapidly moving forward - that's what will determine the success of the new leadership. Since the jasmine revolution two years ago, there have already been a handful of governments, all trying to master the challenges of a reborn country: reinstating safety throughout the country, offering a perspective in life for around 200,000 young academics, and but most of all, adopting a constitution and holding elections. These long-promised reforms are to be implemented by the end of the year. Considering the extent of public discontent, the new government can be sure to be measured against the results it delivers. This mostly concerns the areas of security, economy and political order. There is a lot to be done, and many say that changes will only be recognised once they have a tangible impact on people's daily lives. Major distrust against policy makers The biggest problem for the new government - and, with it, the democracy model itself - are deep issues of trust that politicians throughout the country are facing. Surveys suggest that more than half of the electorate is not going to take part in the next vote based on the mistrust they harbour against their political leadership. "This lack of trust constitutes a big burden," said al-Jurshi. When the Jasmine Revolution took off in Tunisia, the calls were not for democracy, but for "bread," "justice," and "dignity." People cried out for social justice and work. But so far, no matter who has been in control of the country, these demands have not been met. "If there is no economic stabilization, Tunisia it at risk of facing true anarchy," al-Jurshi said. Ennahda learns from its mistakes Tunisiadoes have an abundance of political parties - more than one hundred - but there's really only one which is present in all regions, cities, and on all social levels: the Islamist Ennahda, which emerged as the strongest party in the country's first freely held elections in October 2011. It has teamed up in a coalition with the social democrat Ettakol party and the center-left Congress for the Republic of President Marzouki - a cumbersome alliance, it turned out, as disagreements happen frequently. This ‘troika’ does hold a 109 seat majority in parliament, but that doesn't mean it's capable of running the country. "Ennahda came from a public movement,” said al-Jurshi. “What it lacks is competency and a concrete plan of action - for instance, when it comes to the economy." It's because of this that Ennahda, once it was part of the government, has lost a lot of its popularity. Society in the making: A "no violence against women" poster shows that there are still many issues to address The formation of the government indicates that Ennahda is bearing the consequences from these mistakes. At the end of February, they surrendered their claim to key areas of responsibility within the cabinet - areas that are now being led by proven experts. Newly appointed as interior minister, the renowned investigative judge Lotfi Ben Jeddou, now also needs to look into the murder of opposition leader Chokri Belaid, an event that plunged the country into a deep crisis. It falls upon Nadhir Ben Ammou, a professor of law and now minister of justice, to reform the judiciary. The legal system still has a reputation for representing the interests of the fallen dictator Ben Ali, operating in many cases neither independently nor fairly. Last, but not least, former ambassador to the UN, Othman Jarandi, will take over the position of foreign minister. The only office that Ennahda continues to hold on to is that of the head of government itself. It is now in the hands of the new government to determine if Tunisia will make use of the newly gained freedom from the Jasmine Revolution and transform it into democratic structures.


Tunisian Activists Found a News Agency In early 2011, protests led mainly by young Tunisians caused President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali to flee the country he'd run with an iron fist since 1987. Many of those youth activists are still active today. Some have gone on to found an Internet news agency called Tunisia Live. One of the reasons the Tunisian revolution succeeded is because the country's young people used social media as their weapon of choice. And that's how Tunisia Live started, too -- disseminating information exclusively over the social network Facebook. Nowadays it also operates its own website, tunisia-live.net. English is the agency's main working language.


Tunisian Activists Found a News Agency Anfang 2011 stürzten meist jugendliche Tunesier das autokratische Regime Ben Alis, das seit 1963 das Land kontrollierte. Viele dieser Aktivisten engagieren sich bis heute. Einige von ihnen haben die Online-Nachrichtenagentur "Tunisia Live" gegründet. One of the reasons the Tunisian revolution succeeded is because the country's young people used social media as their weapon of choice. And that's how Tunisia Live started, too -- disseminating information exclusively over the social network Facebook. Nowadays it also operates its own website, tunisia-live.net. English is the agency's main working language.


Tunisia is expected to reshuffle political cards in historical election Tunisians are set to go to polls on Sunday to elect a new parliament for the first time since the 2011 revolution. But many citizens don't know who they will vote for - if at all. The rain clouds are hanging low in the sky over Douz, a small town in southwestern Tunisia. Douz is often called "the gateway to the desert" - the sun tends to beat down mercilessly on the few travelers here. Tourists used to stop in this town of 30,000 on their way to the Sahara Desert - but they barely come anymore since the political upheaval of 2011. "They are scared of kidnappings, but nothing has ever happened here," said Am Sadok shrugging his shoulders. He has spent 52 years repairing shoes and bags in a tiny shop on the market square. He has seen plenty of presidents come and go. Ali Larayedh, who is holding a speech on the square today, has in the past two years been Tunisia's interior minister, then prime minister. He is one of the most well-known faces in the Islamist Ennahda Movement party. Around 500 people have come to watch his campaign event, standing in a light rain. Larayedh talks about the fight against unemployment, economic development in the country, and addressing the crimes committed by the dictatorship. He himself served a long prison sentence - including 10 years in solitary confinement under the rule of Zine El Abidine Ben Ali. To vote or not to vote "That was an honest, very clear speech - that's how an election campaign should be," says Saad Ben Ahmed, who comes from a small village nearby. He has already decided to vote for the Islamists on Sunday. "They're clean! They want to improve the situation in Tunisia and they don't collect money for their own pockets," - like the country's rulers used to do. Sunday's election is likely to lead to a run-off "It's all just blah-blah," counters Chiheb Nasr, who runs a wholesaler for cosmetic products. "People aren't interested in politics anymore, because since the revolution all we've heard are empty promises, but nothing has actually changed." He thinks it's important to go and vote, but he can't decide who for. "Really, I don't find my ideas represented in any of the manifestos." Ennahda emerged from the 2011 election for the constitutional assembly as the strongest force. They were considered honest, god-fearing, and victims of the former dictatorship. Three years ago, that brought the Islamists a lot of votes, but they quickly had to learn that government responsibility often results in a loss of reputation. The quick improvement for the population failed to materialize, and the attacks of suspected radical Islamist fighters on the American embassy in September 2012 and the murder of two Tunisian opposition activists in February and July 2013 plunged the Ennahda's coalition into a deep crisis. After months of tough negotiations, they declared that they were willing to step down - a clever, strategical move, as it turned out. In the meantime, the party's reputation has recovered - thousands have appeared at campaign events. Stepping down, even when you have been legitimately elected, is proof that it is possible unite Islam and democracy, Ennahda's politicians never tire of saying. Caught in the past? The Nidaa Tounes ("Call of Tunisia") party, Ennahda's strongest political opponents, say this is all a façade. They say Ennahda is planning to make society more Islamic, and is untrustworthy. "If you don't vote for Nidaa Tounes, you're voting for Ennahda," party chairman Beji Caid Essebsi told his supporters in Hammam Lif, a suburb of the capital Tunis. The 87-year-old founder of the party that positions itself as the secular counterpoint to the Islamists, wants to be president of Tunisia in his old age. His party spans a wide spectrum, from the left to former cadres of Ben Ali's now defunct party RCD. But a lot of voters think this spectrum is too broad, and fear a return of the old guard through the backdoor. "I've come here to take a look, but I definitely won't vote for Nidaa Tounes," says Selim, a young man watching the event from a distance. "They remind me too much of Ben Ali's time." Ennahdha Movement supporters gather in Douz ahead of elections Both major parties have now announced that they expect to gain a third of the votes. That won't be enough for government, which could make a kingmaker of the Free Patriotic Union, run by businessman and soccer club chairman Slim Riahi. His party could become the third biggest party in the parliament - or else Ennahda and Nidaa Tounes could divide the cake among themselves - because the two conservative parties have more in common than many supporters are prepared to admit. While Essebsi is running in the presidential election in November, Ennahda is concentrating on Sunday's parliamentary election - so a division of power might well be possible. While the results of Sunday's election are expected in the middle of next week, the presidential election is likely to need a run-off. There are 27 candidates for the November 23 presidential election - the run-off wouldn't happen until the end of December.


Marzouki: 'Problems don’t end after a revolution' Ahead of a visit to Germany, Tunisian President Moncef Marzouki tells Deutsche Welle that his country could take a leaf from Europe’s book as it struggles with the transition to democracy. Deutsche Welle: Mr President, you've always emphasized agreement and moderation between the various political forces. Is this strategy in Tunisia justified after the assassination of opposition politician Chokri Belaid last month? Moncef Marzouki: Of course, more than ever. That's because if this country wants to tackle its socioeconomic problems, it needs political stability. I want us to find a consensus with respect to the constitution and the government. We need a message of reconciliation to bring peace to the country so that we can continue with the transition to democracy. Tunisia has not yet overcome its crisis. How do you think a solution can be found with the government under the leadership of Prime Minister Ali Larayedh? The new government faces huge challenges We're dealing with the problems of a country that's just gone through a revolution and is in the process of building democratic structures. You can see a clear difference compared with other countries: Portugal needed eight years for democratization, Spain took three and we're doing it in two. Tunisia has gone through many political crises but the country has always remained stable. I think we're making good progress. In which areas are things going well? Until two years ago, we had a dictatorship without freedom of expression, without the freedom to demonstrate and without the opportunity to set up non-profit organizations. We've now got those freedoms. The press criticizes the government and the president from morning to night. More than a thousand non-governmental organizations have been formed and more than a hundred parties. So in this respect, the transition is complete. But we are lagging behind when it comes to the socioeconomic area because we have to admit that the situation is much worse than we thought. We are working on improving it but we don't have a magic wand. Besides, we're currently rebuilding and reforming state institutions. We're taking time so that the media regulatory body, the election authority and the law on independence of the judiciary is based on as wide a consensus as possible. But it's a complex, long-running and frustrating process. We are losing an unbelievable amount of time and energy. But that is a real learning process in a democracy. You stress that the uprising in Tunisia mainly had social and economic reasons. But if you follow the debates in the Constitutional Assembly and the media, then it's largely about questions of identity. There are two kinds of extremism in Tunisia - religious and secular. That first category includes Salafism, which is only a façade of a social problem. The impoverished working class has been rising up against the Ennahada party which considers itself a moderate Islamic party. On the other hand, you have secular extremists who get hot under the collar when they hear of Islamists or just the word "Islam." But for the majority of Tunisians, the important questions revolve around bread, water, electricity and economic development. You recently said at the European Parliament that the post revolution is more difficult than the revolution itself. What's the biggest challenge? It's a psychological challenge. The people think that the problems will simply disappear after a revolution. But they don't, they only change. Earlier we had problems stemming from a dictatorship, today they're from a democracy. Of course there are immediate concrete results of a democracy too - the fact that people aren't afraid anymore is fantastic. But the economic expectations are so high that it leads to disappointments. It's impossible to meet the demand that corruption should end overnight and that everyone should get jobs. Tunisians are demanding further reforms Many countries in the European Union long supported former President Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali. Today, the EU supports the new government but also criticizes the strengthening of Islamists. Do you still see Europe as a credible partner? The EU is our most important partner and we want it to stay that way. It's true that many Europeans equate Islamists with terrorists. They will have to change their perception and learn that there are different kinds of Islamists. Just like the Christians Democrats in Europe, we will have Islamic Democrats who are conservative and at the same time respect democracy. What do you expect concretely from Europe? Germany has plenty of experience in building up a constitutional court. It can support us in the same endeavor. We're very happy that Germany has accepted to divert a part of Tunisian debt into development projects. Besides, we'd like to set up a German-Tunisian university and work together in key areas such as energy. Since the revolution in Tunisia, the significance of local regions has become all important. Is the German federalist model interesting for Tunisia? Yes, absolutely. I've suggested a project in which Tunisia would be divided into seven regions that would be largely independent when it comes to economic development. It would be great if Germany would take over a kind of sponsorship when it comes to all areas - civil society, regions and state. Tunisian President Moncef Marzouki is visiting Germany on March 21 and 22. He studied medicine and psychology in Strasbourg and worked as a doctor in France. In 1979, he returned to Tunisia where he headed the Tunisian League for Human Rights from 1989 to 1994. He spent four months in prison after he tried in 1994 to run in elections against former President Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali.


Frustrated protesters take to Tunisian streets Angry demonstrators have protested against local officials in the Tunisian city of Siliana. A police crackdown left to more than 250 people injured and revived the chants that ousted former dictator Ben Ali. Thousands of demonstrators took to the streets in the northern Tunisian city Siliana this week to protest economic problems. The reasons for the protest are similar to those that ousted dictator Zine El Abidine Ben Ali two years ago: poverty, unemployment and anger at regional officials were behind this week's sometimes violent protests in Siliana. "They're pocketing all the money for themselves," protesters said. The UGTT trade union has called for the resignation of the governor put in place by the Islamist Ennahda party, which won Tunisia's first post-Arab Spring election last year. On Saturday, media reports said Tunisian Prime Minister Hamadi Jebali appeared ready to remove the governor from his post. Protests are being led by a trade union "He says that more than 60 percent of the planned local development projects have been finished, but other than two fences around his house and a school nothing here has been built. Do you call that development?" said Ahmed Chaffai, the UGTT's deputy regional director. Anger and unemployment There are about 6,000 unemployed people in Siliana, about 130 kilometers (81 miles) southwest of the capital, Tunis, and more than 4,000 of them have university degrees. Investments in the region in the first 10 months of 2012 have fallen by nearly 45 percent compared to a year ago while the number of jobs has dropped by two thirds. "The only thing that changed for us after the revolution is freedom of expression," one demonstrator said. He finished university in 2010 and has yet to find employment and said his older sister has also searched in vain for a job for the last eight years. Demonstrations escalated to violent clashes with security forces Residents' frustration is growing and clashes with police during what were initially peaceful demonstrations have stoked anger. The police fired birdshots at protesters and more than 250 people were injured during a recent protest, according to official figures and at least two people were blinded when pellets damaged their eyes. On Saturday, security forces fired tear gas at protesters as well as live rounds into the air to disperse the demonstrators. Special police forces forcibly entered an operating room at a local hospital to arrest demonstrators, one hospital employee said. "We have treated injured police in the same way as the demonstrators," he said. "They do not seem to realize the difference between the street and a hospital." In Tunis, hundreds of people protested in front of the Interior Ministry, demanding the resignation of the minister, and called on authorities to stop the violence in Siliana. 'Get out Jebali' In addition to calling for the governor to be removed, residents of Siliana have also called on the prime minister to resign and said he was responsible for the escalation of violence in their city. For his part, Jebali has called for an inquiry into the violence, but said the time for politicians to be thrown out of office a la Ben Ali has come to an end. Two years after removing Ben Ali in the beginning of what would be called the Arab Spring, social tension continues to grow in Tunisia placing the government under increasing pressure. The constitution, which should have already been drafted, is not moving forward and the economy is suffering because of the instable political situation. Lives for many people in the country's interior, from which the 2010 revolution began, have worsened over the last two years. A potential deal could calm the situation in Siliana. The compromise calls for Jebali to sideline the city's mayor, handing day-to-day duties to the deputy governor, and for steps to be taken to promote development in the city. Representatives from the UGTT trade union called the compromise a positive step and added that they wanted to see concrete action. Protesters had said earlier that they would continue demonstrations until the governor steps down, police violence ends and a development program for the region is in place.


Second Tunisian Salafist inmate dies A Tunisian Salafist who had been jailed for his alleged role in an attack on the US embassy in September has died while on hunger strike. He is the second Salafist prisoner to die in Tunisia in as many days. Muhammed Bakhti's lawyer and Tunisia's justice ministry confirmed that the Salafist had died in hospital, two days after fellow Islamist Bechir Gholli died; Gholli had refused to eat for nearly two months. “It's a shame that Tunisians die in prison after the revolution," Bakhti's lawyer, Anouar Aouled Ali, told the news agency Reuters. The pair had insisted on their innocence and protested against their prison conditions. They were among more than 100 people arrested in Tunis in September when protestors angered by an anti-Islam move made in California attacked the US embassy. Bakhti and Gholli had both began their hunger strike almost immediately after their arrests. The protest on September 14 led to the ransacking of the US embassy. Bakhti was believed to have been a prominent figure in the Salafist movement and to have had close relations with the organizer of the attack, Abu Iyad, who remains at large. sej/ipj (AFP, Reuters)


Tunisia still struggling after the revolution Tunisia’s uprising is not over. On a regular basis, demonstrators rally in Sidi Bouzid, where the Tunisian revolution started. The protesters are frustrated with the slow pace of economic change in the country. In Sidi Bouzid, protesters often meet to rally in front of the town hall. In December 2010, the young street vendor Mohammed Bouazizi burned himself to death at this very spot. His death sparked mass protests across Tunisia, the ouster of the country's longtime dictator President Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali and eventually, uprisings throughout the Arab world. Today, the protesters at Sidi Bouzid city hall are demanding jobs, which was a key issue that sparked the original demonstrations. "We're just struggling in the same situation," said protestor Alawi Tahrir. "I have a master's degree in English language, and I have still been unemployed for five years." Economic tensions The demonstrators' chants merge with the muezzin's call to noon prayer in this hardscrabble, agricultural city. Islam has deep roots here, and it's reflected in the politics. This sculpture was erected in Sidi Bouzid in Bouzizi's memory The Islamist Ennahda Party has benefitted from the fall of the old regime. It won the most seats in last October's election to the constituent assembly - tasked with writing the country's new constitution. Mohammed Sukry, a local Ennahda leader, said he blames the current economic instability on anti-government agitators. "Leftists and the old ruling party instigate these demonstrations," Sukry said. "They will support any social movement against the government." He added they were just a small number of people, representing those parties that lost the elections. But they did not represent the majority of the population. Yet economist and banker Chedly Ayari said the economic discontent is widespread and real, particularly among recent college graduates. "Two-thirds of these strikers are young people who were promised during the campaign for the constituent assembly that they would get jobs," Ayari said. "They never got jobs." Restructuring takes time Tunisian unemployment is estimated to be at some 19 percent. Ennahda has only been in power since January, and its leaders say they need more time to repair the economy. Said Ferjani is a member of the Ennahda political bureau in Tunis. The government, he said, is beset by ultra-conservative Islamists on the one side and leftist unions on the other. "We have to restructure an economy that has failed the country for more than half a century," Ferjani said. "We cannot do it in 100 days. We need more time and we need some kind of stability. Some of the people don't want stability because they don't want the government to succeed.” He said his government is encouraging foreign investment to generate jobs and has recently accepted financial aid from the US to reduce its budget deficit. "We have to diversify our relationships," Ferjani said. "We must strengthen our relations with the US in particular, with the EU, and the West. We are proud of this relationship with the US. We disagree on a few issues, about Israel and Palestine. We said let's agree to disagree." Mhenni's blog "A Tunisian Girl" gained worldwide fame during the revolution Sitting at a Tunis café, Lina Ben Mhenni, strongly disagreed. She criticized Tunisia's growing alliance with the US. The activist blogger and university lecturer said the US opportunistically supports Tunisia's new government, after years of supporting the brutal dictatorship of Ben Ali. "The US doesn't care about Tunisians, doesn't care about people or human rights," Ben Mhenni said. "They were aware of the situation in which we were living. They closed their eyes because they had economic and other interests with Ben Ali. Now they are doing the same with the Ennahda Party." Serious challenges ahead Ben Mhenni criticized Ennahda for trying to shift the debate away from economic questions to issues of Islamic identity. For example, the government has supported recent court decisions that jailed bloggers for posting cartoons with critical portrayals of the Prophet Muhammad. The government has also put a TV station owner on trial for airing the animated film "Persepolis" which allegedly violated Tunisian sacred values. Radical Islamists in Tunisia protested against the film "Persepolis" "They deflect the discussion to fake debates, about identity, about religion," she said. "I don't see any willingness to change the situation or improve it. They say that we have to give them time. But they didn't even offer plans or programs." Tunisia faces serious economic challenges in the years ahead. Protestor Alawi Tahrir said the Tunisian revolution isn't over yet. "The same system of Ben Ali is still running in the veins of this government," he said. "We want new blood. We want a new system." Tunisia has scheduled parliamentary and presidential elections for the spring of 2013. Until then, analysts said, political turmoil and economic instability may well continue. Author: Reese Erlich, Sidi Bouzid, Tunisia / ar Editor: Sabina Casagrande


Tunisia: "Being the voice of the People" To date, the only way for Tunisians to get local news has been by word of mouth. But in Jendouba province, that's about to change. DW Akademie is helping an NGO set up an online radio service to broadcast local news. Tunisians have never read or heard stories about things happening in their own community. Five years after the ousting of the dictator Ben Ali, many regions still don't have independent local journalism. Although the Tunisian media today enjoy more freedom and independence than before, most of the country's journalists focus almost exclusively on national politics and events in the capital, Tunis. News from Tunisia's 24 provinces and stories about the people who live there remain an exception.  But that's now set to change - in Jendouba province for example, Tunisia's most northwesterly province. The local non-governmental organization (NGO) Rayhana is working there to promote women's rights and greater equality for women. With help from DW Akademie, fifteen Rayhana volunteers are aiming to set up a community radio outlet to broadcast regional news. DW Akademie trainer Sarah Mersch is helping prepare the young women for this new challenge. "It's important that people living here can find out about things happening in the region that directly affect them," says Mersch, who has been living and working in Tunisia for the past several years. Promoting women's rights: Student Marwa Whibi will be working as editor for Jendouba's community radio The community radio station is set to go "on air" this year - as an online radio service. Marwa Whibi, a student from Jendouba University, is taking part in the DW Akademie training to learn the tools of the radio trade. "I'm hoping that I and the other young women working on the project will become the voice of people living in the region who otherwise have no voice at all."  In various seminars participants practice interview techniques, discuss how to identify the appropriate interview partners and transform dry news items into lively radio reports. By the second day of training, Mersch is very optimistic. "I've seldom worked with a group that’s so motivated and quick to learn," she says.  Digital radio as mouthpiece and source of revenue  Professional use of audio-editing software is just one of the topics that Mersch and her co-trainer, Imen Ezini, will be focusing on. Thirty-year-old Ezini is editor-in-chief at Radio 3R (Radio Regueb Revolution), a community radio station in the province of Regueb in central Tunisia. Ezini herself is a graduate of a DW Akademie train-the-trainer program. "Well-trained female journalists can help tear down the walls that still exist for women here," she says with conviction.  Compared to the rest of North Africa, Tunisia is seen as being particularly liberal and progressive on women's rights, but huge problems remain, especially in the regions,” says DW Akademie country coordinator for Tunisia, Bernd Rössle. "Women in a rural province like Jendouba are doubly disadvantaged. The region offers little in the way of opportunities, jobs or infrastructure, and as women, they're tied down with children and families. They also often need permission from their husband or father to travel to another city." An important part of DW Akademie's country strategy in Tunisia is to give these women a distinct voice. Jendouba online radio volunteers at their editorial meeting. It's still just practice, but the station will soon go on air Working together with Rayhana fits into the concept, and the NGO has already made some progress on improving local women's rights. In Jendouba, for example, Rayhana has been organizing cultural events as well as a catering service that uses local products. This way, Rayhana aims to become more independent in the longer term. In addition to broadcasting about issues concerning women and girls, the journalists also want to reach other target groups and are working on ideas to develop the right mix of topics.  Strengthening civil society from the ground up  There are also other joint regional projects on the agenda this year. With DW Akademie support, Rayhana is planning to hold its own events and campaigns to highlight women's rights, and as a way to create an effective lobby group for women. The NGO also wants to get a clearer sense of its main target groups in order to better understand their needs and aspirations. To do this, says Bernd Rössle, the first step is to create strong and reliable structures within the organization. "The demonstrations across Tunisia over the past weeks clearly show that people are demanding better prospects," he says. And these, he stresses, have to be developed from within the country itself, inspired and promoted by organizations like Rayhana.


Tunisian NGO fights for political transparency A Tunisian organization is monitoring the actions of government officials. Its aim is simple – to ensure greater transparency in politics so the country doesn't stray from its path towards democracy. Al Bawsala has its office in an old building, in the heart of the city, adjacent to the bustling Tunis market. Al Bawsala ("The Compass") is a Non-Governmental Organization (NGO) which wants to ensure that Tunisian politics is steered in the right direction. Apart from computers and internet access, the organization's five young workers need, above all, energy and a great deal of patience. Their aim is to achieve greater transparency in government by showing Tunisians what their politicians get up to behind closed doors. The result of 50 years of dictatorship The constituent assembly won't tell what happens at its meetings That's not yet always the case, as is exemplified in the constituent assembly. For almost a year now, the assembly has been working on a new constitution, but progress is slow. What goes on inside parliament is largely unknown to outsiders, and minutes are published only rarely and only after pressure. To counteract this lack of transparency, Al Bawsala publishes on its website Marsad.tn as much information possible about the constituent assembly. But the workers at the NGO want to achieve more. The organization's 31-year-old director, Selim Kharrat, attributes the lack of a culture of transparency to Tunisia's more than 50 years of dictatorship. However, he says that even those who weren't part of the system and who came to power only after the revolution aren't necessarily any better. "None of the members of our current government who were in the opposition or in prison under Ben Ali has any notion of responsibility towards the Tunisian people," he says. But the politicians are accountable to the people: "They think that because they were elected that they get a free ride. Their whole way of thinking needs to change and that takes time." Putting pressure on politicians Kharrat want to expose more information on back door politics Al Bawsala started a website, based on a German model, which helps citizens to directly post questions to their Members of Parliament. Their answers are then published on the website for everyone to see. The website allows Tunisians to check if their MPs are adhering to their campaign promises - and if they aren't, it gives them the opportunity to put pressure them to do so. In collaboration with the German site "Abgeordnetenwatch" ("MPwatch") and the Berlin organization MICT (Media in Cooperation and Transition), Al Bawsala developed its own version, adapting to it to the Tunisian context. However, Kharrat says that they can't do all their work over the internet because many MPs don't have internet connection in their offices. So Al Bawsala has a appointed a parliamentary correspondent "to question MPs directly and to upload their answers as a video or audio file to the Internet." The answers are then available to Tunisians who, for the most part, have computer and Internet access. Fighting for democracy Protestors celebrate the anniversary of the Tunisian revolution Co-founder of Abgeordnetenwatch, Gregor Hackmack, is advising Al Bawsala. The German site has been online since 2004. Hackmack believes that the concept can also work well in Tunisia. "It's just a great opportunity to steer it in the right direction, now when institutions are just being formed and having to work out their procedures. I think Al Bawsala can make a big contribution with the Marsad.tn project.” Hackmack says minor setbacks and daily confrontations with politicians shouldn't discourage the young team. "This is normal with democracy. You must continuously fight for it to be established.” Selim Kharrat, who returned from studying and working in France specifically to work for Al Bawsala, is optimistic that Tunisia's path toward democracy will be successful. “We will do it, just not tomorrow. It will take years.” But Tunisia was doing quite well compared to other countries in the so-called Arabian Spring - at least the country hadn't sunk into violence. Tunisia held its first free elections in October 2011, and since then, it has been slowly moving along the path of democracy. Al Bawsala has already won its first victory after the NGO published details of how each MP voted over the dismissal of the head of the Tunisian Central Bank. Since then, the members of parliament are now well aware they're being watched.


Bloggers criticize Tunisia's failed revolution Two internet activists in Tunisia have been sentenced to prison sentences because they published caricatures of the Prophet Mohammed. Tunisian bloggers are disillusioned. Their revolution appears to have failed. Souhaib Zammel types on his iPad, glancing around nervously. Again and again he reaches for his mobile phone. The Tunisian living in exile is a blogger and was visiting DW's Global Media Forum in Bonn to meet like-minded people from around the globe. Zammel has been studying in Germany since 2003. His German is very good; only a slight French accent is audible. Zammel published his first blog when the initial sparks of revolution flew in Tunisia. "I could finally put into words everything that had built up in the past 20 years," he said. Zammel published texts about burning houses on Facebook and various blogs, passed the information on to his fellow countrymen to let them know what was happening. "Our flow of information does not move like in Germany," Zammel said. "The people living in the countryside often remain uninformed." A short time later, he took the initiative and flew home to Tunisia. "I tried to document what was happening back home," he said. Zammel took pictures of burning police stations and hotels. "They hadn't even been published in Tunisia yet." A military court gave Ben Ali a life sentence in absentia Zammel is proud that he contributed a little bit to getting the revolution in Tunisia going. When the protests in the capital Tunis on January 14, 2011 mobilized the masses, President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali fled. Arbitrary authorities Today, Zammel is disillusioned. Two young men in his home country have been sentenced to long prison terms because they allegedly posted naked depictions of the Prophet Mohammed on Facebook. "This incident shows me how selective the government and the public prosecutor's office is now," he said. Thousands of death threats, instructions for building bombs and calls for violence had been published on Facebook. "But nothing happened - no legal action, they didn't do anything." While caricaturist Jabeur Mejri has been in prison since the end of March, his friend Ghazi Beji was able to flee to Europe after the charges were filed. Zammel is most angered by the selectivity of the authorities. Even if he personally does not agree with the statements by Mejri and Beji, they "have the right" to express their opinions. According to Zammel, only ideological and political motives could lie behind the verdict. Zammel and Ayadi are losing hope that lasting change will come to Tunisia Anis Ayadi is shocked, as well. "The revolution was made to provide more freedom, so that you can express your opinion." Ayadi also lives in Germany and was attending DW's Global Media Forum. He turned his back on Tunisia in 2007. The educational opportunities were just too poor. Today, he studies in Cologne. He is also frustrated about the situation in his home country. The struggle of the past months has made him tired and the current situation in Tunisia saddens him. "It used to be that the regime controlled us, now the government controls us through people who are disguised as bloggers," Ayadi said. He said there are blogs that are infiltrated, and Facebook profiles of government critics that are so besieged with spam that Facebook shuts them down automatically. This is censorship in the year 2012, he said. Processes increasing Islamists took over power in Tunisia in 2011 after Ben Ali was overthrown. Since then, there have been growing numbers of cases involving alleged violations of morals and values. In February, authorities filed criminal charges against a newspaper publisher and two journalists for republishing a photograph of German-Tunisian soccer player Sami Khedira and his girlfriend Lena Gercke. The Arabic daily Attounissia reprinted a photo originally published in the magazine GQ showing Gercke, a model, naked with only Khedira's hands covering her breasts. A Tunis court fined publisher Nasreddine Ben Saida 500 euros ($625) for "disrupting public order and decency." Earlier this month, riot police in Tunis clashed with Salafists angered by an art exhibition they claimed insulted Islam Blogger Anis Ayadi has also been a victim of personal attacks. Salafists threatened him and his sister during a visit to Tunisia because she was not wearing a headscarf. "They insulted me because I told them my opinion," Ayadi said. Zammel's story isn't much different. He is threatened and his blogs are criticized. "I feel bitter and I also don't like what I hear from my friends in Tunisia," Zammel said. He has had to cut down on his activities. His studies have suffered too much recently. Government propaganda online Fatma Riahi was the first Arab blogger to go to jail. In 2009, she published texts against the regime, and publicly exposed nepotism in Tunisia. She was a thorn in the side of the government in Tunis and subsequently spent one week in jail. During this time, she experienced a wave of solidarity by her fellow Tunisians. But despite the revolution and the freedom of speech, Riahi is not at peace. Tunisian protesters still hope for lasting change "Today many sides present me as being loyal to Ben Ali," Riahi said. "That is utter nonsense. I was never on his side." Her theory is that the government has tasked some bloggers to spread bad vibes about critics. She said she is disillusioned. "The revolution is a monstrosity," she said. "It's not enough to cut off the ogre's head. The entire body must be brought down and rebuilt." Ayadi said he is truly worried about his country. The educational system is too poor and the Salafists now only want to build Islamist and religious schools. "I am scared for Tunisia," he said. "But the hope still lies with the youth. What we need now is a new revolution." Author: Arne Lichtenberg / sac Editor: Rob Mudge


Tunisian president hopes for reconciliation between secularism and Islamism Tunisian President Moncef Marzouki speaks to DW and calls for reconciliation between secularism and Islamism in his country, criticizing extremism on both sides. Tunisia's society is "divided into two parts: secular and conservative," the president said in an interview with Deutsche Welle. These two parts of society need to be "united." The Tunisian government should represent both sides, adds Marzouki, who was elected interim president of Tunisia after the revolution in 2011. He is a member of the centre-left party Congress for the Republic. According to Marzouki, political groups are hindering a peaceful transition in Tunisia: "They don't want this process to be fulfilled, they don't want this process to be peaceful, they don't want elections - they would like to provoke chaos." He specifically referred to "Jihadists, parts of the Salafist groups," but maintained that at the other end of the spectrum there are "secular extremists" who "don't want this transition to be peaceful, mainly for ideological reasons, because for them 'Islamist' means 'devil.' They don't want to hear anything about the fact that we are a Muslim country." The assassination of secular opposition politician Chokri Belaid was a shock to him, he says: "We were very proud in Tunisia of having this very peaceful process of democratization, of transition. […] I felt betrayed by the Islamist extremists, the Jihadists." At the same time, Marzouki once again criticized the secularists: "Sometimes I also feel betrayed by the extremists of the other side, because they are giving the image of a country in turmoil, and the press here in the West is relying mainly on what they say. So the image they are giving of Tunisia is not the real one." On the whole, Marzouki thinks his country is on the right track. "We reached a consensus on the constitution and we think that the constitution will be finished in two months. And we are going to have elections between October and December. […] Please remember that the transition in Portugal took more than eight years and in Spain more than three years. Tunisia will finish its own process in two years." He points out that this is impressive for a country without "any experience of leading a democratic process." In Marzouki's opinion, more time is needed for the economic situation to improve: "We cannot do miracles. The situation is extremely tense because people are expecting everything - and now. We cannot do anything but explain to them that we are working hard to achieve the political process. This will stabilize the country and then we will be able to attract more investment." Tunisia could learn a thing or two from Germany about the importance of consensus, he added: "Here in Germany they know what consensus means, and they know how it's important not only at the political level but also at the social and economic level, between trade unions."


Prime Minister Larayedh unveils new Tunisian government Prime Minister-designate Ali Larayedh has unveiled Tunisia's new government. The Islamist-led coalition is expected only to serve until a new election is held before the end of the year. Larayedh formally submitted Tunisia's new cabinet to President Moncef Marzouki on Friday. "I presented to the president the dossier containing the list of the new government and a summary of the government program," Larayedh announced on television. "We expect that the government line-up will receive the confidence." As with the previous government, the ruling coalition is led by the Islamist Ennahda party and backed by the center-left Ettakatol and Marzouki's secular Congress for the Republic party. That coalition controls 109 out of 217 seats in National Constituent Assembly, giving them the majority needed for cabinet approval. Although several ministers kept their posts, Ennahda surrendered control of key interior, justice and foreign ministries to independents. Former UN ambassador Othman Jarandi was named foreign minister. Lofti Ben Jedou and Rachid Sabbagh – both of whom are judges – were named interior and defense minister respectively. Larayedh said the new cabinet would work "to the end of 2013 at the latest," assuming a new constitution was adopted and legislative and presidential elections were held in the meantime. He suggested those elections could take place in October or November, but said that was a job for the assembly. The prime minister-designate, who replaced Hamadi Jebali after he resigned last month, said he hoped to get back to work as soon as the cabinet was approved. "Our country needs work and discipline … we need national unity," he said. Jebali stepped down after the assassination of secular leftist opposition politician Chokri Belaid on Feburary 6. That event sparked the country's worst unrest since the revolution to overthrow longtime strongman President Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali two years ago. dr/hc (AFP, Reuters, dpa)


Tunisian Prime Minister Hamadi Jebali resigns Tunisian Prime Minister Hamadi Jebali is stepping down after failing to form a new government to quell the country's political crisis. He announced his resignation after a meeting with President Moncef Marzouki. "I promised and assured that, in the event that my initiative failed, I would resign as head of the government, and that is what I have done," Jebali said in a news conference Tuesday. #video#The prime minister's initiative to form a government of nonpartisan technocrats was rejected Monday by his own leading moderate Islamist Ennahda party. He had proposed the initiative to ease the turmoil caused by the assassination of secular opposition politician Chokri Belaid on February 6. Jebali, who spent 15 months as prime minister, had earlier threatened to quit if his plans for the technocratic government failed. "The failure of my initiative does not mean the failure of Tunisia or the failure of the revolution," Jebali added, referring to the ousting two years ago of the autocrat Zine El Abidine Ben Ali, which sparked a wave of uprisings across the region. No one has claimed responsibility for Belaid's killing, which caused riots across the country. His death heightened the frustration among secularists who believe Jebali's government has not dealt firmly enough with religious extremists in Tunisia. The unrest has also disrupted efforts to revitalize Tunisia's economy, which has struggled in the wake of Ben Ali's overthrow. OnTuesday, Standard & Poor's lowered its long-term foreign and local currency sovereign credit rating for Tunisia, citing "a risk that the political situation could deteriorate further amid a worsening fiscal, external and economic outlook." dr/slk (AFP, Reuters, AP, dpa)


No gay rights revolution in Tunisia Homosexuals in Tunisia celebrated the ouster of dictator Ben Ali, hoping it would improve their situation. But in nearly two years, little has changed for the country's gay and lesbian community. Houssem sits in a café on the main street of Tunis. As a student and gay man in his early twenties, Houssem is unwilling to give his real name for fear of discrimination and possible intimidation. He doesn't talk to the Tunisian media at all about his online work as a gay rights advocate, because all too often the people making the inquiries turn out not to be journalists. "Social media helped the revolution here, and now we want to use these tools to fight for our rights," he says. "Some people have supported us, but there have also been a lot of negative reactions." In the jubilant atmosphere after January 14, 2011, Houssem and a group of like-minded individuals founded Gayday, an online magazine for homosexuals in Tunisia. Suddenly what had appeared impossible under dictator Zine El Abidine Ben Ali seemed to be within reach: being able to express themselves openly without fear. Gayday grabbed many Tunisians' attention for publicizing a topic that had long been discussed only behind closed doors. Not illegal, but taboo Gayday aims to increase awareness of homosexuality in Tunisia Homosexuality is not explicitly illegal in Tunisia. However, Article 230 of the Tunisian penal code, which was written in 1964, makes anal intercourse a crime punishable by up to three years imprisonment. Even though this article is seldom enforced and does not apply only to homosexuals, it hangs as a constant threat over gays in Tunisia. Asked about Gayday magazine on a talk show, the Tunisian Minister for Human Rights, Samir Dilou, a member of the Islamic Ennahdha Party, said even freedom of expression has limits. "Of course these people are also citizens, but there is a red line and that line is our morals, our history and our culture," he said, adding - to the presenter's consternation - that that sick people needed to be treated. "That was a politically-correct type of insult," says Houssem, with a wry smile. After all, he explains, the minister did not explicitly refer to homosexuals as sick. Gentle education, not gay pride Even though countless civil society organizations were founded after the uprising of January 2011, not one is specifically focused homosexual rights. Only the Tunisian Association for Minorities has taken a clear position on the issue. Association President Yamina Thabet has called for discrimination against minorities to be made a criminal offense. "I dream of a day when homosexual Tunisians can walk down the street with their heads held high and be proud of themselves; a day when they also have the right to walk into the nearest police station and press charges when they're discriminated against," she said. Gayday is Tunisia's first online magazine for the gay and lesbian community For Houssem, the most important issue is informing homosexuals of their rights, and reaching out to the public. The problem, he says, is mainly that people simply don't know enough about gays and lesbians. Religion and the rise of Islamism are not the main problem, Houssem believes. He adds, though, that Islam does provide people with a pretext with which to justify homophobia. Houssem believes that the key is to work slowly and constantly on changing Tunisians' views of homosexuality. "We're not going to start with a gay pride down the main street. That would be a really bad idea. It would hurt the cause rather than help it," he laughs. The main thing he thinks they should focus on now is creating awareness of gay rights, in society and among potential supporters. Houssem has not yet told his friends and family he's homosexual, because he's scared that coming out will turn his life upside down. "Maybe I will tell them one day, when I'm financially independent and have a roof over my head," he says. "It's hard to wake up every day and not be able to be myself."


Tunisian opposition leader Chokri Belaid killed Leading leftist Tunisian opposition leader Chokri Belaid has been killed. Protestors have flocked to the interior ministry after Belaid's family accused the country's ruling Ennahda party of being behind the death. Chokri, the secretary-general of the Unified Democratic Nationalist Party, was shot dead Wednesday morning as he was leaving his home in Tunis, his family said. "My brother was assassinated. I am desperate and depressed," his brother, Abdelmajid Belaid, told the AFP news agency. "I accuse … [Ennahda leader] Rached Ghannouchi of assassinating my brother," he said. Prime Minister Hamadi Jebali also denounced the killing, but said the identity of the killer was unknown. "The murder of Belaid is a political assassination and the assassination of the Tunisian revolution. By killing him they wanted to silence his voice," said Jebali, who represents Ennahda, the party which won the first elections in Tunisia following the 2011 Arab Spring. Some 1,000 people gathered outside the interior ministry to protest the killing, and President Moncef Marzouki cut short a visit to France and cancelled a visit to Egypt scheduled for Thursday. The Tunisian government has faced many protests over economic hardship. Belaid had been critical of the country's leadership, especially the moderate Islamist Ennahda party. He accused authorities of not doing enough to stop violence by ultraconservatives who have targeted mausoleums, art exhibits and other things seen as out of keeping with their strict interpretation of Islam. dr/hc (Reuters, AFP, AP, dpa)


Tunisian authorities arrest dozens of hardliners Police in Tunisia have arrested 86 Salafists for committing sabotage and arson. The violence reflects the deep deep divides in the country over the role of religion in society. Tunisian police detained 86 people in Tunis on Tuesday in a clampdown on Salafi Islamists who rioted overnight in protest to an art exhibition. The Salafis claimed that the art was offensive to Islam. It was not known whether there had been any injuries in the confrontation.  "The fact that the violence erupted in several places at the same time makes us think that it was organised," said ministry spokesman Khaled Tarrouche, adding that an investigation was underway.  On Tuesday, protests occurred across the capital city with Salafi adherents blockading roads and tram lines in the quarter of Intilaq, forcing shops to close, according to witnesses.  On Sunday, hundreds of protesters had sabotaged artwork at an exhibition in the Tunis suburb of La Marsa, which featured paintings caricaturing Mecca and a piece depicting a nude woman. And on Monday night, extremists set alight a police post in La Marsa and a security kiosk located in Kram. The police responded to the violence with shots, according to witnesses.   On the same day, al-Qaeda’s leader implored Tunisians to protect Islamic law from the political party Ennahda, which has governed the country in coalition alongside two secular groups since winning the country’s first post-revolution election in October. It has confirmed it will not try and establish Islamic sharia law in the new Tunisian constitution.  Salafists in Tunis have stepped up their violent behavior in recent weeks. There have been reports of members of the sect brandishing clubs and swords and setting alight shops selling alcohol. There are estimated to be around 10,000 Salafists in Tunisia, although the movement is far from homogeneous; adherents range from the strictly religious to violent and aggressive jihadists. And many Salafis claim they will not participate in behavior which they deem to humiliate Muslims or denigrate Islam. But most want a larger role for Islam in the country, something which secular elites oppose.  sej/msh (AFP, AP, Reuters)


Tunisia sees signs of a counter-revolution For months Tunisians have suspected that loyalists to the former dictator they toppled remain influential in politics. Now, they believe they have proof of it, and are taking to the streets once again. Scenes of young men rioting and getting charged by police in Tunis may recall the revolution in January that toppled a dictator, Zine El Abidine Ben Ali. But they're happening now, in a country that's rising in protest against the government it put in place to assure that revolution's goals. Recent demonstrations generally go like this: angry protestors march down Avenue Habib Bourguiba, Tunis' main thoroughfare; then riot police fire tear gas and start charging; and what was once a river of humanity becomes a vacant street within seconds. "Traumatized, I'm traumatized," yelled Majid Saidi, amid a crowd of thousands, all out protesting what they say is a counter-revolution being launched by government figures loyal to Ben Ali, "We never saw this kind of thing under Bourguiba (former president - ed.), nor under Ben Ali - not even under the French!" The controversy blew up when a video appeared on Facebook last week. In it, former Interior Minister Farhat Rajhi, a highly trusted public figure in Tunisia, states that Ben Ali loyalists still hold sway in the political sphere and that they are planning a military coup, depending on the results of July's election. Whether Mr Rahji's accusations are true or not are almost immaterial in paranoid post-revolution Tunisia. They became a political bombshell because they were confirmation, coming from a highly respected former public figure, of suspicions already harbored by many, such as Imen Megri. "It's true that Ben Ali, the man, left the country but Ben Ali, the regime, lives on," she says. Police crackdown  Security forces have launched further crackdowns on protesters Megri runs along a side street from Avenue Bourguiba, trying to escape the tear gas and riot police, flanked by her friend Fatima, who would only go by her first name. She has come out with clear demands: get rid of any remaining influence of the Constitutional Democratic Rally (RCD), Ben Ali's now defunct party. "We're sick of these people," Fatima yells as she shuffles along the narrow street. "We want to be in peace - they should get the hell out of here." With these new protests and police crackdowns comes a return of state practices Tunisians thought were in the past: internet censorship and police beatings of journalists. "First he tried to grab my phone from me and my camera," says radio journalist Marwa Rekik, who says she was accosted by a policeman while covering the protests. "He hit me on the head - I have five stitches on my head." Rekik's legs are covered in bruises she says were sustained from police batons in the same attack. Some 14 journalists say they were subject to police beatings during these protests. Revolution not over For its part, the government declined to comment for this story, but in a nationally televised interview Sunday night, Prime Minister Beji Caid Sebsi denied a counter-revolution is underway, calling former Interior Minister Farhat Rajhi a liar. He also said the beating of journalists was a police mistake, something journalist Rekik finds hard to believe. "Fourteen journalists were attacked, not just one," she says. "They could say they took me for a citizen but there were fourteen of us and each of us said we were journalists." The optimism and euphoria of January's revolution has given way to a distinct sense of paranoia and dread in Tunisia. People here say the revolution is not over yet and that its goals are far from being assured. All they can do for the moment, is continue the fight. "We aren't here for bread or for higher salaries - we simply want our dignity," says protestor Houdi Ben Aisha, who carries a placard reading 'No Justice, No Peace' on Avenue Habib Bourguiba. "We must never, never, never let go." Author: Don Duncan, Tunis Editor: Rob Mudge


Tunisian prime minister calls election in bid to quell unrest Tunisia’s prime minister has called an election in a bid to ease tensions following the assassination of an opposition politician. Meanwhile, eight Tunisian soldiers have died in an ambush near the Algerian border. Prime Minister Ali Larayedh (pictured right) made the announcement on state television on Monday, following emergency Cabinet and security meetings chaired by the president, Moncef Marzouki. "This government will stay in office: We are not clinging to power, but we have a duty and a responsibility that we will exercise to the end," the prime minister said, proposing a specific date for a general election. "We think that the National Constituent Assembly will complete the electoral code by October 23 at the latest so elections can be held on December 17," he said, referring to work being done on drafting a new constitution, which he said was about 80 percent complete. He also expressed confidence that the voters would re-elect his Islamist Ennahda party. "The government is not incapable of calling for popular support to discover whether the people are with this government or with those who want to take it backwards towards the unknown," Larayedh said. The move came in response to a wave of anti-government protests that followed the assassination of opposition politician Mohammed Brahmi on Thursday. Brahmi was the second opposition politician to be killed, after Chokri Belaid was gunned down outside his home in February. The opposition have blamed the government for both assassinations. They have also called for it to be replaced with a government of national unity. Thousands of protesters demonstrated outside of the parliament building in the capital, Tunis, on Monday, to demand that the government step down. The interior ministry, though, said there were also supporters of the government among the demonstrators. December 17 is a significant date in Tunisia, as it was on that day in 2010 that fruit vendor Mohamed Bouazizi burned himself alive in the town of Sidi Bouzid, sparking the revolution that brought down the regime of longtime strongman Zine El Abidine Ben Ali. There were also reports on Monday of clashes between anti-government demonstrators and police in Sidi Bouzid. Attack on security forces President Marzouki gave a televised statement late Monday to condemn a "terrorist attack" that claimed the lives of eight Tunisian soldiers. Gunmen ambushed the troops on Mount Chaambi near the Algerian border, according to state television. "Our country is threatened. We are all targeted," Marzouki said. "We will have sacrifices and victims, but we find ways to win the victory over terrorism." "I call on all politicians at this historic moment to stand for the nation and unite," he added. Ten thousand protesters took to the streets in Tunis calling for the government's ouster in light of the terrorist attack, according to the news agency DPA. "Tunisia is free, out with terrorism, out with Ghannouchi," protesters shouted, referring to the leader of the Ennahda, Rached Ghannouchi. kms, pfd/ccp (Reuters, AFP, AP)


Tunisia identifies suicide bomber, closes Libyan border Tunisia has closed its border with Libya following a spate of 'IS'-linked attacks. The attacker in the most recent suicide bombing has been identified as a Tunisian national in his 20s. Tunisian authorities identified on Thursday a suicide bomber who killed 12 elite presidential guards earlier this week. Tunisian national Houssam ben Hedi ben Miled Abdelli, a 27-year-old local street vendor, was indentified by his DNA, according to the country's interior ministry. In an attack claimed by self-styled "Islamic State" (IS) militants, Abdelli boarded a bus full of guardsmen on a busy street in the capital Tunis on Tuesday and detonated a suicide belt. The assailant came from a working class neighborhood at the edge of the city, and his occupation caused many to draw parallels to another street vendor - 26-year-old Mohamed Bouazizi, who touched off the Tunisian revolution in 2011 after committing self-immolation in protest of his treatment by police. Bouazizi's death prompted a wave of protests that eventually ended in the ouster of President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali, who had been in power for over 20 years, and the establishment of a democracy hailed by some as perhaps the sole sucess story of the so-called "Arab Spring." Government response criticized However, as Tuesday's attack marked the third bout of IS-related violence in Tunisia this year, the government of Prime Minister Habib Essid has come under fire for not doing enough to combat extremism. The earlier attacks - at the Mediterranean resort of Sousse and the National Bardo Museum - claimed 60 lives, all but one of them foreign tourists in a country where tourism plays a substantial role in the economy. Essid said on Wednesday that because "some of the materials used in the bombing are not available in Tunisia, but they can be found in Libya," the country would close its border with its highly unstable neighbor. The government also pledged a domestic curfew, a promise to implement a new terror law approved over the summer, and a personnel increase of 6,000 for security forces fighting on all fronts from maritime border protection to detecting and removing extremist websites. The prime minister also said a youth employment program created to tackle issues in regions plagued by poverty and religious extremism would be put in place "from next week." To many opposition lawmakers, however, these measures were insufficient. Both leftists and Islamists have called for a more concentrated response to terrorism - starting with a special session of parliament to address the issue. Thousands of Tunisians have traveled to neighboring Libya, as well as Iraq and Syria, to support Islamic extremism. Authorities believe that the perpetrators of both the Bardo and Sousse attacks received training in Libya. es/msh (AP, AFP)


Most Jewish citizens have left post-revolution Tunisia Tunisia is home to one of the world’s oldest Jewish communities. On the eve of the country’s independence from France in the 1950, there were more than 100,000 Tunisian Jews. Today, more half a century later, as few as 1,500 remain. Naomi Scherbel-Ball traveled to Tunisia to meet with the few Tunisian Jews remaining and asked them about how they see their future in post-revolution Tunisia.


The BOBs: A Tunisian blog wins “A Tunisian Girl”, a blog by Lina Ben Mhenni, is this year’s international winner of Deutsche Welle’s blog awards. Mhenni is a former participant of a DW-AKADEMIE bloggers conference. "The BOBs" winner Lina Ben Mhenni For the past several years 27-year-old Tunisian Lina Ben Mhenni has been commenting in French, English and Arabic on her country’s social and political developments in a blog called atunisiangirl.blogspot.com. An instructor at Tunis University, Mhenni has been documenting Tunisia’s journey towards democracy following the revolution. During the protests in December 2010 and January 2011, she traveled to Sidi Bouzid and Kasserine to report on the repressions and violence there. Her blog was banned by the government for a long time and was only accessible outside the country. In October 2010, just three months prior to the revolution, Lina Ben Mhenni had taken part in the DW-AKADEMIE bloggers conference, the Young Media Summit, in Cairo. This year DW-AKADEMIE and the German Information Center Cairo (Deutschland-Zentrum Kairo) will again be organizing a conference for bloggers in the Egyptian capital. Eighteen Arab and German bloggers will meet from May 24 – 26 for the second Young Media Summit to discuss and blog about “New Media and Reform in the Arab World.” The Arab participants come from Egypt, Tunisia, Algeria, Syria, Bahrain, Palestine, Lebanon and Yemen. The participants will write about their discussions on the summit’s online platform as well as on their own blogs. They will also research specific topics, such as the changing role between Egyptian citizens and the state, and the role of women during the revolution and thereafter. “The situation in Egypt has completely changed since the last conference so participants will be able to speak even more freely than the last time,” says DW-AKADEMIE project manager Jens-Uwe Rahe. “Many bloggers and Internet users are now asking themselves how they can contribute in the long run to the changes in their country and society.” During the closing podium discussion, which will be open to the public, the Young Media Summit 2011 participants will present their results and discuss them with members of the audience. The event is to be held May 26, 2011 at Cairo University’s Faculty of Mass Communication and is entitled “Between Tahrir Square, Facebook and Al Jazeera: People and Media in the Arab Revolution”. Deutsche Welle’s Arab-language broadcaster, DW-TV ARABIA, will also produce a one-hour talk show in which Arab and German conference participants will discuss these and related issues with a young audience. The program will be broadcast May 27, 2011 on DW-TV ARABIA.


Tunisian women fight new 'sexist' constitution A clause in Tunisia's draft constitution has sparked uproar and concerns that women's rights are under threat. Some Tunisian women are fighting back. When Tunisia's National Constitutional Assembly published the new draft constitution earlier this year, its references to women provoked outrage. One article stipulated that the roles of men and women "should complement each other within the household." For decades, women in the North African nation have enjoyed some of the most far-reaching rights in the Arab world. Many have successful careers in business and politics. For example, women account for nearly half the lawmakers in the ruling Islamist Ennahda party. But some women now perceive the new definition of gender roles as a threat to their freedoms. 'An open door' to rights abuse One of these opponents is Selma Rekik, who runs a family business near Tunis that specializes in automobile cables and food processing. So far, she has always felt comfortable operating in sectors traditionally dominated by men. "Sometimes when you start a new project [as a woman], people might be a bit wary," said Rekik. "But that changes as soon as you assert yourself, you show that you're efficient. I've been respected because the results have been good. In Tunisia, I haven't had any problems." But the problematic clause in the constitution could change this. Thousands took to the streets in protest when it was made public in August. The ruling Ennahda party has been described as 'moderate Islamist' "Lawyers who have interpreted this article consider it an open door to other excesses that can compromise women's rights," said Rekik. Rekik acknowledged she came from a privileged family where male and female members were treated equally. But she also saw other Tunisian women asserting themselves across the workforce. Many of her factory's employees are women - as are the farmers working for her food processing company. "Very often, it's the women who work to pay for their children's food and clothing and their education. They're the element of stability in the family." Rights activists like Khadija Cherif blame the Ennahda party, which inserted the offending paragraph, for going back on campaign promises to uphold women's rights. She believes more hard-line Islamists will twist the vague legal wording to suit their interests. "It threatens equality," said Cherif. "Because when you talk about 'complementarity,' it could mean barring women from work - because it could mean that men work and women stay at home. It could even mean a return to polygamy." Already, according to Cherif, women and even young girls are being pressured to wear the hijab, which used to be a rare sight on Tunisia's streets. Defense from conservatives But at Ennahda's headquarters, party leader Rachid Ghannouchi offered a more egalitarian interpretation of the controversial clause. "In three different places, the constitution states that equality between men and women is guaranteed," Ghannouchi told DW. "In the fourth place, there is a reference to complementarity. While there is complementarity between women and men in the family setting, it doesn't mean one is better than the other, or has more rights or responsibilities." Tunisia's religious conservatives approve of the new laws In fact, more conservative Tunisian women, like university student Hajer Ben Jemaa, argue that they have more rights today than before the revolution, because they can assert their religious beliefs. "Today in Tunisia, I'm free to wear this hijab," said Ben Jemaa. "I don't have problems with the police or at school. With Ennahda I have hope." Taking action For her part, Rekik believes Tunisian women should be free to wear what they want. But she is not waiting for politicians to determine her future. Earlier this year, she helped to establish a new, secular party - Call of Tunisia (Nidaa Tounes) - founded by former prime minister Beji Caid el Sebsi. "If I'm getting into politics now, it's because I want to fight for what we have achieved as women, as Tunisians," said Rekik. "I accept difference - the debate of ideas. But not regression - not rolling back women's rights." Call of Tunisia is off to a good start. A recent poll placed the party second behind Ennahda, with 20 percent of Tunisians backing it.


Opinion: Congratulations to Tunisia for the Nobel Prize The Nobel Peace Prize is not only for the Tunisian National Dialogue Quartet. The award is encouragement for all those working for peace and democracy in the Middle East and North Africa, Rainer Sollich writes. Angela Merkel would have deserved the prize just as much as Raif Badawi or Pope Francis. Instead, the Norwegian Nobel Committee once again surprised the world by giving the award to a recipient on no one's radar: The peace prize went to the Tunisian National Dialogue Quartet for their service in the creation of a pluralistic society following the "Jasmine Revolution" - the first of the "Arab Spring" revolutions, and the only so far that has not seen the fallout of chaos, war and new repression. As unexpected as the announcement was, it was no hasty choice. Those acknowledged with the award are not just the human rights activists, lawyers, employers and union representatives who stood with the Quartet to help keep Tunisia free from the civil wars, violent upheavals and new dictatorships that have plagued so many of revolutions it inspired. The award is also an encouragement to everybody who - often at great personal risk - fights for democracy, civil society and peaceful change throughout the Middle East and North Africa. Rainer Sollich And ultimately the award is an acknowledgement of Tunisian society as a whole. For - despite repeated acts of terror, further security threats and an extremely difficult economic situation - the people of this tiny Maghreb country have given totalitarian and extremist powers of various stripes no chance whatsoever of establishing themselves. Much more than that, they have committed themselves to the difficult task of creating dialog among Islamists and secularists - and thus kept the stalemates and conflicts that have developed in Syria, Libya and Egypt from happening in their country. That is the only true path. So, congratulations to the people of Tunisia! As different as the underlying conditions of countries in the region may be, Tunisia is a role model - and Tunisia is a prototype. That is why Tunisia will always be at risk: Neither jihadists nor secular dictators are interested in a successful example of the difficult synthesis of democracy, Islam, civil society and stability. That would be a direct threat to their own authority. Tunisia, however, is also fragile, and it has many unsolved problems. It supplies more fighters to "Islamic State" than many other Arab nations. Therefore, the Nobel Peace Prize is also a signal to Europe and the rest of the world that, yes, It is important to keep a close eye on Syria, Iraq and the other hot spots in the region, and, yes, it is important to conduct crisis management as efficiently as possible and grant asylum to refugees - but it is also just as important to ensure that new hot spots do not flare up in the region, and to support the hopeful beginnings of peace and democracy in Arab countries. Tunisians deserve that. And we should support them generously.


DW Akademie trains Tunisian journalists prior to elections DW Akademie increases its activities in Tunisia to support the country’s ongoing democratization process. A new project for Tunisian radio and TV journalists focuses on election and political reporting. Tunisia's first fully-fledged parliamentary and presidential elections since the overthrow of president Zine El Abidine Ben Ali in the 2010-2011 revolution are expected to be held in mid-2013. They follow the elections for a constituent assembly, which were held in October 2011. In this situation, the mass media play a pivotal role in the transition process, as they inform the public and help shape political opinions. "Until last year, elections in Tunisia never followed a democratic path," said Michael Tecklenburg, coordinator for North Africa at DW Akademie. "This creates a problem for Tunisian journalists, as they have little experience in reporting on free elections." To address this problem, DW Akademie will cooperate with selected radio and TV stations in Tunis and other cities in northern, eastern and southern Tunisia: DW consultants and trainers will not only train journalists in various aspects of political reporting, but also advise their colleagues with regard to the long-term planning of election campaign coverage and production management. The project will start in September, after the end of Ramadan. Creating a new generation of Tunisian journalists DW began its engagement in Tunisia in February 2011, right after the downfall of the former president Ben Ali, with a series of workshops on political reporting for radio, television and online journalists representing both public and private media. The aim was to provide the mainly young Tunisian colleagues with basic skills for covering the election for the constituent assembly. Other projects looked at the role of the media in general, and of public service broadcasters in particular, ethical issues in blogging and citizen journalism, and standards of academic journalism education - together with DW Akademie’s local partner, the Institute of Media and Information Sciences (IPSI) at Tunisia's Manouba University.  "We are very happy that we are able to cooperate with such a highly respected institution”, said Tecklenburg. "Our long-term goal is to contribute to the creation of a new generation of well-trained, professional and democratic-minded journalists in Tunisia.” Excellence in media capacity development Besides Tunisia, DW Akademie implemented major training and consultancy projects in Egypt and Libya - two other North African countries that have recently undergone political upheavals - in 2011 and 2012. DW experts supported partner stations in both countries during the recent parliamentary elections, and are cooperating with universities and other training institutions in both countries. A number of training workshops focusing on political, economic and environmental reporting for radio, TV and online journalists were conducted in Algeria and Morocco. In addition, DW Akademie increased its presence in the region by opening an office in Tunis, Tunisia's capital, in December 2011. It serves as a base for coordinating DW Akademie's activities in the Maghreb region, which are mainly financed by the German Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperation and Development, the German Federal Foreign Office and the European Union.


Tunisia one year after: the beginning of change When a young vegetable vendor set himself on fire on Dec. 17, 2010 in the town of Sidi Bouzid, no Tunisian could have imagined that a month later, the longtime dictator President Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali would be ousted. Frustrated and humiliated, Mohammed Bouazizi doused himself in fuel and set himself alight. His deeply symbolic act sparked a chain reaction of protests in the small Mediterranean nation. A wave of demonstrations, brutally struck down by police, extended across the country - supported by parts of the Tunisian general labor union UGTT. Initially, the protests only spread to Tunisia's inland areas, but by the end of December they reached the capital Tunis and, in early 2011, the country's universities. "The country was like a cooker that was under too much pressure," said a young protester at the time. The combination of unemployment, corruption and oppression created an explosive mixture, which the Ben Ali regime initially underestimated and then couldn't get under control. On the evening of January 13, 2011, after tens of thousands of people took to the streets in Sousse and Sfax, Ben Ali tried to change the course. "I made mistakes," he said in a televised address. "Now I have understood you." He announced that no more live ammunition would be used and that Internet censorship would be abolished. Tunisia is still today speculating about what occurred in the next 24 hours. On the morning of January 14, tens of thousands of Tunisians protested in front of the Interior Ministry. Despite the curfew and closed-off airspace, two planes took off from Tunis-Carthage airport in the evening. The presidential family left the country, shortly thereafter the visibly nervous Prime Minister Mohammed Ghannouchi declared on state television that Ben Ali was temporarily unable to hold office. On January 15, an initial interim government was put into place - the first of many. The rifts become visible "If we had known that this entire system actually consisted of a cardboard facade that collapsed as soon as you even gently tap it, we would have dared to take action a lot earlier," said Skander, a computer scientist in his mid-30s. But the Ben Ali regime was able to instill fear in the population for years, leaving them to believe that the police state was almighty. Regular protests against the authorities had already taken place in the impoverished mining regions in Tunisia's inland since 2008. But the police were still able to regionally contain those uprisings and knock them down. The fact that the protests this time spread to the entire country was also thanks to the power of social networks, which despite massive censorship were able to replace the traditional state-controlled media and spread information about the protests around the country at lightning-speed. Tunisians were able to vote freely for the first time in October One year after Mohammed Bouazizi's self-immolation, Tunisia has taken an enormous step forward. In October, the first free elections were held, a month later, the newly elected Constituent Assembly took up its work. Its task is to create the basis for the country's further development within a year. But within this year, the rift through Tunisian society has become visible. It was hidden as long as the Ben Ali system had a common enemy. The elections in which the moderate Islamist party Ennahda won 89 seats - some 40 percent of the Assembly's mandate - express the fragmentation of the secular opposition. Most parties had focused their campaign on the economy and creating jobs. The constitutional project only played a secondary role in the campaign. "We're losing sight of the most important thing," says the philosopher and Islam Studies scholar Youssef Seddik, who had run in the election as an independent candidate. "What kind of a state do we want Tunisia to be in the future? How do we want to live?" Time for vigilance The Constituent Assembly, which will also present a new interim government, is faced with major challenges. For 2011, the Tunisian central bank forecasts zero economic growth, nationwide unemployment is at 18 percent, in some regions within the country even more than 50 percent. Veteran rights activist Moncef Marzouki was sworn in as interim president on Dec. 13 "Ennahda won the elections, because they promised the people what they wanted to hear: work and stability," Seddik said. But many of Ennahda's voters can relate little to the party's religious convictions, the 68-year-old said. He views the supposed Islamization of the country relatively calmly. But not only the economy needs a boost. The interior and justice ministries are in need of reforms. They are still home to the former powers. The reformation of the feared police apparatus is also only progressing very slowly. Many Tunisians are therefore afraid of a counter-revolution. Seddik said the people must remain vigilant. He refers to the French Revolution, which required years to stand on solid ground. "Behind almost every revolution there is a question mark for a relatively long period," he said. "But I am optimistic. The old system has been toppled and the people dare to voice their opinion without having to be afraid!" Seddik said he was convinced this was the most important step toward democracy. Author: Sarah Mersch / sac Editor: Rob Mudge


Women try to assert independence in post-revolution Tunisia Women were a key force in the popular protests that toppled Tunisia's government last year and kicked off the Arab Spring. But now many Tunisian women worry that the new government may want to turn back the clock. Women were a conspicuous force when Tunisians took to the streets in 2010-11 to oust former president Zine El Albine Ben Ali. But when Ben Ali stepped down on January 14, 2011, it opened up new debates about the role of women in Tunisia. After gaining independence from France in 1956, Tunisia was one of the most progressive countries in the Arab world in terms of women's status. Women were quickly given the right to divorce and vote. In 1981, in a move to combat what was seen as an outmoded religious custom, Tunisia actually banned the hijab, or headscarf, in state offices and at universities. But with the moderate Islamic Ennahda movement having won 40 percent of the vote in the 2011 elections, some women now fear that the government may try to compel them to adhere to certain practices, traditional and otherwise. "I don't want anyone to force me to do anything," Salma, a young translator from Tunis told DW. "If I decide some day to wear a headscarf, or even a burqa, no one has the right to tell me yes on no." The same, she added, applied to drinking alcohol or having a boyfriend. The Ennahda-led government has repeatedly assured the public that it will not try to roll back the rights of women. But skeptics fear that words are one thing, and actions another. Veils and distractions Demostrations for women's rights are common in Tunisia Since last November, sit-ins by Islamist students have brought the humanities department at Manouba University in Tunis to a standstill. The students have demanded that female students be allowed to wear the full facial veil or niqab while taking exams, and that the university allocate space for daily prayer. "It's a false debate intended to distract attention from the truly important problems, the economic and political development of the country," says Rafiqa, an editor at a Tunisian weekly newspaper. "We have to work at ensuring progress in our country, and with that in mind, the women are simply going to have to remove their veils." Rafiqa herself has worn a hijab since marriage, but she says demands to allow niqabs, which could obscure the identity of women taking exams, go too far. She admits she fears such protests could herald the beginning of a two-class society for men and women. "Tomorrow, there'll be separate busses for men and women, and the day after that separate universities," she complains. "We want to keep moving forward and not make a U-turn." Others are less interested in cultural issues such as veils and more concerned with female participation in the economy and politics. In elections to the constitutional assembly in October 2011, men and women were supposed to alternate on the lists of the various parties. But the political reality looks very different. Gender quotas? A debate has commenced about headscarves and veils "In the first two transitional governments, there was only a single women," says Najoua Makhlouf, a member of Tunisia's largest trade union, the UGTT. "After the elections, there are only two women in the government. Those are catastrophic results for us women." Yet even within the UGTT, with its 48 percent female members, the top positions are exclusively held by men. Makhlouf is one of the few females to have an official union post, in her case the chair of the union's women's commission. "The mentality is simply sexist," she says. "The social milieu of Tunisian trade unions is traditionally masculine. A quota for women would be our salvation." But Makhlouf adds that last year's revolution was only the beginning, and that the fight for a truly democratic Tunisia was just getting started. And she's not alone in thinking this way. "We Tunisians are no longer going to allow ourselves to get trampled on," Salma says. "The politicians have understood this, and they are going to think very carefully about what they do." Although it generated new debates about the role of women in a Muslim society, the revolution of 2011 clearly showed Tunisian women that they can have considerable political power. Author: Sarah Mersch / jc Editor: Sabina Casagrande


French hope cash will entice Tunisians to leave Thousands of Tunisians have fled their homeland since the revolution. Many are now living rough in France, and some say they want to return. The French government is offering them 300 euros to leave, but some want more.


Tunisian police claim to have arrested Belaid's suspected killer Tunisian police say they have arrested a hardline Islamist suspected of having killed a leading opposition politician. The government has not yet commented on the report. Details about the arrest, first reported late on Monday, remain sketchy, with some accounts saying police had also taken an accomplice into custody. The AFP news agency cited police sources and local media, which reported that the main suspect, a 31-year-old man, had been arrested in a suburb of the capital, Tunis. It said both he and an accomplice, who allegedly drove the motorcycle on which the suspected killer escaped from the scene of the crime, were members of the radical Muslim Salafist movement. Reuters quoted an unnamed security source, who confirmed only that the suspected killer had been arrested. Express FM, a local radio station, cited what it described as a "senior security source," who said three Salafists had been arrested, but provided no further details. Neither news agency was able to reach the interior ministry for comment on the report. The reported arrests come three weeks after opposition politician Chokri Belaid (pictured on placard above) was gunned down outside of his Tunis home. The 48-year-old secular politician's family have accused the ruling Islamist Ennahda party of being behind his assassination, something the party has denied. Tunisia's first political assassination in a decade sparked three days of anti-government protests. Prime Minister Hamadi Jebali responded to the crisis with an attempt to form a government of technocrats to lead the country until fresh elections could be held. However this was rejected by his Ennahda party, which in turn led Jebali to step down. Last Friday, the country's president, Moncef Marzoki, asked the interior minister, Ali Larayedh to form a new government and gave him two weeks to put together a cabinet. Last week, Larayedh said that arrests had been made in the case. "The investigation has not led yet to identify the killer, those behind the murder and its motives," he said. The January 2011 uprising that swept longtime Tunisian strongman Ben Ali from power was the first of the so-called Arab spring revolutions that spread through the region in the following months. pfd/lw (Reuters, AFP, dpa)


In Tunisia, many young people heed the call of 'IS' and al Qaeda More than 5,000 Tunisians are currently fighting for al Qaeda and the "Islamic State." Extremists have been especially successful at recruiting youth there. Sarah Mersch reports from Tunis. "He said he was going to spend the night at a friend's house. A day later we received a text message that he was in Syria." Iqbel Ben Rejeb's voice trembles as he recalls the day in March 2003 when his younger brother Hamza vanished. The programming student had been contacted by the Nusra Front and traveled to Syria via Libya. He was told he could manage the Qaeda affiliate's websites. Hamza is physically disabled and uses a wheelchair to get around. "I feared they wouldn't have time to take care of him," Iqbel remembers. "I thought they would stick a bomb to his wheelchair and blow him up." Hamza's family was able to save him and get him back to Tunisia. Soon thereafter, Iqbel founded a group to help other Tunisians who were stuck abroad get home - and to prevent others from being brainwashed by extremist ideas. Radicalization after revolution In the 1990s, some Tunisians went abroad to fight in conflicts in Afghanistan, Chechnya and elsewhere. After the country overthrew the strongman Zine El Abidine Ben Ali in 2011, however, the number of Tunisians who have joined terrorist organizations has increased dramatically. Historian and security expert Faysel Cherif says there are two main reasons why Tunisia produces so many extremists, and both are directly connected to the political upheaval of 2011. "Many people want to spread the euphoria that came with the revolutions of the Arab Spring to countries where this didn't happen," he says. Cherif adds that not all Tunisians were radicalized before they left the country. At the same time, extremists in Tunisia began the process of radicalizing young people after the Arab Spring. Most of the leading minds here had been detained during the Ben Ali era and were freed during the prison breaks and amnesties of the revolution. Lacking strategy The recent terror attacks on the Bardo museum in Tunis and a hotel in Sousse, in which dozens of foreign tourists were killed, illustrate the dangers posed to the country by radicalization. Recruiters are paid between $3,000 and $10,000 (2,700-9,100 euros) for each new person they sign up, according to information gathered by the United Nations. According to the Tunisian government, actions are already underway to hinder the recruiting process, including targeting mosques where radical preachers are known to disseminate their views. The Tunisian government has also taken repressive measures. More than 15,000 suspected extremists have been monitored since the beginning of the year, according to officials, with 700 added after the Sousse attack. Tunisians under the age of 35 are no longer able to travel freely to Libya, Turkey or Serbia, typical transit countries to Syria and Iraq. "We need a real strategy," the security expert Cherif told DW. "You can throw a hundred people into prison, but the machine will continue to run. Before you know it, 2 … 3 … 4,000 more will be spit out." The greatest challenge will be to come up with a long-term strategy that will prevent young Tunisians from being attracted by extremist ideology. This has even been recognized by the head of the Tunisian government. Prime Minister Essid says economic uncertainty has driven some youth to extremism "We need to create jobs, especially for people living in rural regions," Prime Minister Habib Essid said, admitting that prospects for many young Tunisians are limited. "Young people have to be economically independent to resist these extremist currents. We are progressing, but slowly." In September, the government will organize a congress for government institutions and civil society that will address the issue of radicalization of young Tunisians. Iqbel Ben Rejeb's younger brother Hamza refuses to speak about what he went through in Syria. "But he was the one who came up with the logo for our group," his brother says with a proud smile.


Tunisian prime minister steps down Tunisian Prime Minister Mohamed Ghannouchi announced his resignation Sunday as security forces clashed with protesters demanding the removal of ministers of the interim government. Tunisian Prime Minister Mohamed Ghannouchi announced his resignation on state television on Sunday amid renewed anti-government rallies in the country, calling for his removal. "I have decided to quit as prime minister," Ghannouchi, 69, told a news conference, saying that he had thought carefully before taking the decision which was supported by his family. "I am not running away from responsibility. This is to open the way for a new prime minister," he said. "I am not ready to be the person who takes decisions that would end up causing casualties," he said. "This resignation will serve Tunisia, and the revolution and the future of Tunisia," he added. Close ally of Ben Ali Tunisia's caretaker President Fouad Mebazaa has named former government minister Beji Caid-Essebsi as the country's new prime minister and called for calm. Ghannouchi was a close ally of former Tunisian President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali who was toppled on January 11 after a wave of angry protests in light of rising food prices and unemployment. Ben Ali, who ruled Tunisia for 23 years, has since fled to Saudi Arabia. Ghannouchi, who took over the interim government, had pledged to lead the country until elections planned for the summer. Renewed street protests  Fresh protests have broken out in the capital Tunis  Ghannouchi's resignation comes after two days of renewed rallies in Tunis, calling for a new government and a new constitution. According to official figures, at least five people have died in demonstrations since Friday and up to 200 injured. The protests turned violent as riot police and masked police in civilian clothes fired warning shots and tear gas at hundreds of protesters. Security forces acted to stop protesters, who were chanting anti-government slogans, from storming the interior ministry. In the biggest of several rallies against the transitional authority, about 100,000 protesters marched down the capital's main avenue on Friday shouting slogans. The fall of Ben Ali after 23 years in power sparked similar uprisings in the Arab world, including one that led to the downfall of long-time Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak on February 11 and another under way in Libya. Author: Richard Connor (AFP, Reuters) Editor: Sonia Phalnikar


Academics, Internet activists confident in power of social media Many still believe in the power of the Internet to induce democratic change. However, others point out that the Tunisian and Egyptian cases are the exception, rather than the rule. Despite the recent unmasking of two supposed female lesbian bloggers who turned out to be straight men, many experts are still confident in the power of social networking to mobilize social change. Whether in Egypt, Tunisia or other global hotspots, many say that the Internet is a political catalyst. "The risk of getting caught is much less than if I go on the street," said Marie Möller, an economist at the University of Münster, in an interview with Deutsche Welle. "And in this way, people realized that they were not the only ones doing it, but others in other parts of the country - they were able to coordinate large protests. And if many people are in a certain place at the same time, the risk of being punished is much less." A chance to test the waters Möller calls this the "upstream coordination problem." She said that in one of her recent studies, she and her colleagues examined the cost-benefit analysis of people who live under dictatorships. There, the incentive for street protests is really low because people are afraid of severe punishment by the regime. However, she said, the Internet is a new way for protesters to coordinate and be effective. One of the most notable online voices from Tunisia has been Slim Amamou, a well-known Tunisian Twitter-user and blogger, who was jailed during the waning days of the Ben Ali regime, and for a brief time was in the post-Ben Ali government as the Secretary of State for Sport and Youth. "It's clear that this revolution surprised everyone," he said. "The power of social media and the Internet was never known to be able to reach this point. The case of Tunisia has proven this for the first time in history - of course it was important." A mixed blessing for social change  Beckedahl doubts that the Tunisian and Egyptian examples can be easily replicated However, some psychology experts note that it's not always easy to translate the simple click to join a Facebook group compared to actually going out in the street and protesting - in other words, that at least in the Egyptian and Tunisian case, that these were different stories. "Before people get on the street, they have to progress emotionally," said Peter Kruse, a professor of psychology at the University of Bremen. Kruse says this high degree of immediate, emotional shock "is no longer necessary" because protesters can read about it online first. "I think that now, these strong emotions are only coming from the side of conservative forces that want to maintain the status quo, and not so much from the active revolutionary side." However, it's important not to get too swept away in the romantic idea that Internet tools necessarily lead to democratic change, warns Markus Beckedahl, who edits the popular blog, Netzpolitik.org. He cited the example of China which has become notorious in exerting sophisticated, tight control over its national Internet. "We are witnessing an arms race between intelligence and censorship infrastructure and anti-censorship tools," Beckedahl told Deutsche Welle. Author: Andreas Noll / cjf Editor: Nathan Witkop


Police swarm the streets as Tunisia reels from beach massacre The Tunisian seaside town of Sousse is still reeling from an attack that killed almost 40 people on Friday. "Islamic State" has claimed responsibility, in which a lone gunman deliberately targeted tourists. Scores of police officers patrolled Tunisia's streets on Sunday, with the nation's interior minister announcing they would "deploy 1,000 armed police to protect hotels and tourists" in the wake of the deadly attack. Earlier, the government said it would crack down on mosques that were inciting hatred, with 80 to be permanently closed. Tunisia's National Security Council is expected to meet later in the day. The shooter, identified by extremist group "Islamic State" (IS) as Abu Yihya al-Kairouni, launched his assault on visitors at the Imperial Marhaba hotel in Port El Kantaoui on Friday, with most of the dead being British citizens. German, Irish and Belgian nationals were also killed, in what is the worst terror incident in the North African country's modern history. Pictures show the shooter calmly walking along the beach, with an assault rifle in his hand. He was also armed with several grenades. Tunisian authorities say the young man was not on any terror watch lists, and may have been radicalized over the past few months. He was later shot dead by police. Witnesses say the gunman told locals to "stay away, I haven't come for you," deliberately targeting foreign visitors. With some holidaymakers still unaccounted for, officials have warned the death toll may rise. Also complicating this is the fact that many visitors did not have identification on them at the time. Late on Saturday, Britain's Foreign Office released a warning that Islamist militants may unleash further attacks on tourist resorts. Already more than 3,000 tourists had fled the country within a day of the shootings. Germany's Interior Minister Thomas de Maiziere said he would visit the scene on Monday, to "express our solidarity with the Tunisian people," adding that there was no cause for concern over the security situation in Germany. Tunisia is widely considered one of the most secular countries in the Arab world, attracting many tourists. This also makes it an appealing target for jihadi terror groups, angry over its tolerance of alcohol and Western lifestyles. It's the second major attack on Tunisia this year, after an assault on the Bardo Museum in the capital Tunis in March. The country is still struggling to cope with the consequences of a 2011 revolution that overthrew dictator Zine El Abidine Ben Ali, as well as a rise in extremism and jihadi attacks. Dozens of police and soldiers have been killed in clashes with rebel fighters over the past few years. Tourism officials say there has been a 26 percent drop in the number of overseas visitors in April compared with the same month in 2014. an/rc (dpa, AFP, Reuters, AP)


Rapping for a new Tunisia Ben Amor's music became the unofficial anthem of the Tunisian revolution. Today, he's still rapping... but his lyrics are very different. Report: Naomi Scherbel-Ball


French foreign minister defends offer of help to Tunisian ex-president The French foreign minister has been criticized for offering to help Tunisian police during the country's uprising. But a Middle East expert tells Deutsche Welle that France's reaction shows wider EU hypocrisy. French Foreign Minister Michele Alliot-Marie sat before a panel of lawmakers on Tuesday to explain her initial reaction to last week's popular uprising in Tunisia, which ousted authoritarian President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali. Alliot-Marie said at the height of the protests that France could share the expertise of its police with Tunisian security forces in "settling security situations of this type." Her comments were quickly condemned by opposition politicians as an endorsement of the violent crackdown on the protests, which killed 78 people. Since then France has distanced itself from Ben Ali, denying him and his family exile and ordering French banks to freeze his assets. Ben Ali was forced into exile after days of violent protests "I am scandalized that certain people have tried to distort my comments," Alliot-Marie told the National Assembly's foreign affairs commission Tuesday after being summoned. "Let's be honest: We were all - politicians, diplomats, researchers, journalists - surprised by the Jasmine Revolution." Turning a blind eye Like many Western nations, France had kept close ties with its former colony and had supported Ben Ali's secular government as a buffer against Islamic fundamentalists, whom they consider a threat to other North African countries. Michael Lüders, independent political analyst and expert on Middle East politics, said Europe talks plenty about human rights, freedom and democracy. But its real priorities with Tunisia are cooperation on curbing immigration across the Mediterranean Sea and the fight against al Qaeda. "In that respect these states have been very efficient, be they police states or not," he told Deutsche Welle. Tough rhetoric from the West is mainly directed at Arab states that do not cooperate with it, like Syria and Iran, Lüders said. Other states in the region are tolerated or supported by the West, regardless of whether they are repressive police states or not. "Of course it would be possible to put pressure on countries like Algeria, Libya or Egypt," he said. "But it is not being done."  The unrest in Tunesia grew from unemployment and government repression  Grave miscalculation Alliot-Marie's original offer of support to Ben Ali's forces was a serious miscalculation, Lüders said, and "she obviously had no concrete information" on how the protests were playing out. But he said France was not the only one to miscalculate the effect the Tunisian government's repression would have on its people. "I think in France, in Germany and in other countries, politicians have simply got used to realizing that there's no democracy in northern Africa," Lüders said. "We in Europe, we in the West, we don't care as long as we can do business." Trade with EU not 'fundamentally wrong'  Lochbihler said the EU's trade with Tunisia is a good thing if it helps the people prosper  The European Union is Tunisia's biggest trading partner, accounting for more than 70 percent of the country's exports. Barbara Lochbihler, a German Green Party member of the European Parliament and former general secretary for the German branch of Amnesty International, said the economic relationship between the EU and Tunisia must continue. "Trade is never fundamentally wrong when it results in the betterment of the people," she said. "But we saw that despite this trade, many were left out of the prosperity. "Economic prosperity can come only when political stability exists at the same time - a political stability that lives up to its name, where people have civil rights and there are multiple parties." Author: Andrew Bowen Editor: Rob Turner


Protests in Egypt continue despite government shut down of Internet Early on Friday, the Egyptian government took steps to shut down Internet connectivity, with reports of telephone networks also being denied. Despite these measures, reports of protests continued in Cairo. On Friday, Egyptians woke up to discover that they no longer had access to the Internet, thanks to the government which had apparently ordered internet service providers (ISPs) to cease international connections. Though one ISP was left operating on Friday, James Cowie of the US-based Internet analysis firm Renesys reported on its blog that "virtually all of Egypt's Internet addresses are now unreachable, worldwide." However, by Tuesday morning, February 1, the remaining ISP, Noor, went offline as well. While there have been Internet slowdowns, and the temporary removal of a China province from the Internet, only on a few occasions has a country been temporarily taken completely offline - Nepal in 2005 and Burma in 2007. "What happens when you disconnect a modern economy and 80 million people from the Internet?" Cowie wrote. "What will happen tomorrow, on the streets and in the credit markets?" During the 2009 protests in Iran, access to the Internet was throttled, and some cell towers were disabled, but the entire country never vanished from cyberspace as Egypt virtually did on Friday. No dialtone Additionally, the government has ordered mobile phone providers to cease operation, as Vodaphone Egypt reported in a statement on its website. "All mobile operators in Egypt have been instructed to suspend services in selected areas," the company said in the statement. "Under Egyptian legislation the authorities have the right to issue such an order and we are obliged to comply with it. The Egyptian authorities will be clarifying the situation in due course."  Mobile phone networks have also been suspended by government order The ramifications outside of Egypt are troubling as activists and journalists struggled to understand the situation there, as Ammar Abdulhamid, a Syrian dissident and human rights activist in the United States, told Deutsche Welle. "The Internet, and the Tunisian precedent made the world take notice of events in Egypt from day one, whereas it took months for them to notice the importance of developments in Tunisia, but even there, the Internet played a crucial factor," he said. "The fact that Egyptian authorities are doing their best to cut off communications and access to the Internet demonstrates its importance from their perspective." 'Reverting back to Protest 1.0' But on the streets of Cairo, the lack of communication presents more immediate problems according to Abdulhamid. "The value of the Internet and mobile technology was and is to facilitate direct real-time communications between activists themselves in the first place," Abdulhamid told Deutsche Welle. "Communicating with outside supporters comes second." However, beyond coordinating protests, other experts said the inability of protesters to quickly communicate via SMS could lead to more injuries. "One thing people use SMS for is to tell other people when they see police and to get out of harm's way, and so more people will end up being injured," said Robert Guerra, director of the Internet Freedom Project at Freedom House, an American advocacy organization. "We're reverting back to Protest 1.0," he told Deutsche Welle. "These are people who are accustomed to tech, we'll have to see how they react."  Despite the lack of technology, protests continued in Cairo on Friday  The fight continues According to the Twitter feed of Diaa Hadid, a reporter with the Associated Press in Cairo, the protests have continued unabated. "Can see teargas plumes and police charging from AP office. Protesters fighting back," she wrote early Friday afternoon. Apparently, the protesters harnessed other social, non-technological methods of organization, according to Guerra, by gathering at mosques to issue a call to organize. Especially since the June 2009 protests in Iran, many in the foreign policy and online intelligensia world have continually debated what role the Internet plays in prompting democratic change around the globe. Evgeny Morozov, a Belarus-born journalist, argues in a new book published earlier this month, "The Net Delusion: The Dark Side of Internet Freedom," that there isn't such a clear causal line between online tools and democratic change. "There's an assumption that the moment that we give information and facts to Russians, Chinese, Iranians and Vietnamese about how bad their governments are, that these people will immediately start going out on the street and protesting," he told Deutsche Welle in an interview earlier this month. "There's this assumption that information is power. Much of this is a myth simply because most people already know how bad their governments are." Still, some disagree with Morozov, most notably Clay Shirky, an American author who has written extensively on the Internet and recently published a piece in Foreign Affairs, extolling the virtues of social media and technology in organizing revolutions. On Friday morning, he wrote the following bittersweet message of vindication on Twitter: "[The] best reason to believe digital media improves public coordination is that the autocrats believe that." Author: Stuart Tiffen Editor: Cyrus Farivar


Has the Arab Facebook revolution lost steam? Are social media and the Internet as relevant today in Arab countries as they were at the height of anti-government protests? Online activists spoke out on the issue and more at the Berlin blogger conference re:publica. The "Arab Spring" in Tunisia, Egypt and elsewhere relied heavily on the Internet and social media to organize and accelerate protests against dictatorial regimes. But do the online tools play an equally important role in anchoring democracy in these countries? "The revolution has shown that the Internet can be a spark to set things in motion," Tarek Amr, an Egyptian activist said. "But to build a democracy, you need other means," he added. The passionate Egyptian blogger witnessed the toppling of President Hosni Mubarak in February last year and even contributed to the protests that led to the event. Amr was among the guests on a Deutsche Welle panel at the Berlin blogger conference re:publica. It's an international event that doesn't just draw geeks and tech fans but also invites political thinkers and activists to speak about current debates. Tunisia at tipping point? So, has the much-touted "Facebook Revolution" in the Arab World lost steam? How has the Internet changed politics and how do political developments impact what's happening online and in the media? These were some of the questions addressed by a lively discussion, hosted by DW editor Robert Mudge. It focused on the situation in Egpyt, Tunisia and Syria. The three very different countries are also witnessing a rapid change in their respective media landscapes. Claire Ulrich has been following media developments in Tunisia Claire Ulrich from the international blogger network "Global Voices" said citizen journalism enabled by social networks such as Twitter and Facebook had by no means petered out after the social upheaval and protests. Ulrich has been following events in Tunisia, especially, very closely. "The traditional media there were earlier steered from the presidential palace," Ulrich said. "Now the country has come to a tipping point - the question is what will be published in future?" Online activists to newspaper journos? Ulrich said she found it encouraging that journalism training workshops were already conducted in a few Arab cities so that young activists could get basic knowledge for their activities as "citizen journalists." They already play an important role in Tunisia. In February, the Tunisian Minister for Human Rights, Samir Dilou, triggered controversy when he said in a television interview that homosexuality was a perversion that needed to be treated medically. Citizen journalists responded with a flood of protests - first online and then on the streets. Claire Ulrich said she had huge faith in Tunisia's cyber activists. "They're still working online. But, who knows, maybe one day they'll become the new newspaper journalists in Tunisia." A funeral as a live stream A different media story is unfolding in Syria. Laila Nachawati, a Syrian blogger, said the media is still as tightly controlled as it has been in the past decades and the state media outlets often present their own version of reality. "They show a parallel world in Syria where nothing happens, where people eat ice cream on the streets," Nachawati said. "Sometimes, they show terrorist attacks but you often see that they are bad fakes because they make mistakes," the blogger said. "They let people operate in front of the camera and then you see how they stand up and go away though they've allegedly been injured. Nobody believes it anymore!" Leila Nachawati says the media's tightly controlled in Syria Laila Nachawati said the Internet showed a completely different side of Syria. An increasing number of online activists in the country risk their lives by uploading demonstrations or funerals as live streams on the web. But that poses problems too, Nachawati said. "It's really difficult to be sure which information is reliable," she said. But Nachawati pinned the blame not on citizen journalists but the government, who she said did not allow foreign journalists into the country. In Egypt too, the role played by online activists is far from losing importance, blogger Tarek Amr said. They often offer different material than the mainstream media, he added. They don't just bring stories that grab attention, are good to market or are simple to tell. "They (online activists) bring everything because their own life is at stake and they doggedly show it," Amr said. Hope and unity Apart from a no-holds-barred portrayal of events on the ground, the Internet is indispensable in Syria in bringing people together, Nachawati said. Egyptian blogger Tarek Amr on the stage at re:publica "We citizens have experienced a wave of solidarity - from country to country. That unites and welds activists together. The communication via the Internet has contributed to that," Nachawati said. "The expression 'social network' is understood literally - people who unite, who overcome political borders." Tarek Amr said the same holds true for Egypt too. "The most important thing that the Tunisians gave us in Egypt was hope," Amr said. In Tunisia, according to Claire Ulrich, the Internet has spawned life-long links - between countries and people.


Demonstrations in Libya and Jordan put Tunisian model to the test The protests in Libya against corruption throw up the question whether the Tunisian crisis heralds the beginning of the end for autocratic Arab leaders. The West is encouraged and is hoping for lasting change. The specter of authoritarian regimes falling like dominoes may however be overly optimistic. While there is no doubt that developments in Tunisia have emboldened the discontent across a swath of land stretching from Morocco to the Gulf, it remains to be seen, according to analysts, whether protestors in other Arab countries have the wherewithal to sustain demonstrations and casualties for weeks and to what degree Arab governments have learnt lessons from the Tunisian experience. Demonstrations in Algeria subsided last week after authorities moved to roll back increases in prices of commodities. Protestors in Jordan have yet to show that they are cut from the same cloth as their counterparts in Tunisia. Protests in Libya erupted three days ago, but have so far largely gone unnoticed by the international media with the exception of a few reports in the Arab press as well as statements and videos circulated on the Internet by Libyan opposition groups. The Libyan opposition website Almanara reported that demonstrators had clashed with security forces in the town of Al Bayda, 800 kilometers (500 milies) east of Tripoli, after throwing stones at government offices in the town and setting a government office on fire. The protesters were demanding "decent housing and a dignified life," Almanara said. Libyan activists and opposition groups reported that hundreds of people had also occupied some 600 empty apartments in Beghazi, Libya's second largest city, and 800 units in Bani Walid, southeast of Tripoli. The activists said the squatters had been expecting to move into new homes promised to them under a government housing scheme, but had seen apartments they had already paid for awarded to others. "Bani Walid has no basic services; thousands of people are without houses and the local authority is corrupted, it only delivers services with bribes. Nothing will make Bani Walid calm but freedom, justice and transparency," the opposition National Front for the Salvation of Libya said in a statement on its website. The Front reported that the lawyers in Benghazi were joining the protests of the squatters. Lessons to be learned?  Libyan leader Moammar Gaddafi is trying to deal with protests peacefully  Libyan leader Col. Moammar Gaddafi appears to have drawn a lesson from President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali's failed handling of the protests in Tunisia, ordering police to avoid clashes with demonstrators while protecting government buildings. The country's Revolutionary Council said in a statement that it would investigate the complaints and promised that "all the problems will be solved soon through the legitimate authorities." At the same time, however, Gaddafi true to his idiosyncratic eccentrism, voiced what other leaders probably believe but have kept to themselves. Describing the departure of Ben Ali as "a great loss" for Tunisia, the Libyan leader said he still considered Ben Ali the country's constitutional leader. The United States and the European Union have so far responded cautiously to the wave of protests in the Arab world, fearing that the unrest could destabilize the volatile region and bring anti-Western forces to power. "The European Union has an interest in keeping a strong partnership. This is why countries including France, Spain and Italy have not clearly condemned what happened," Ivan Ureta, a professor of international relations at King's College in London, told Deutsche Welle. A key concern for the US and the EU is that the protests in most Arab countries like Libya and Jordan, where thousands demonstrated over the weekend against government economic policies and called for the resignation of Prime Minister Samir Rifai, are backed by Islamist opposition forces. "As in all cases of revolution, you must be careful what you wish for. The politics and demographics in these countries mean that what replaces the corrupt old regimes could be even worse; strengthening the hands of terrorists and radicals," Mark Almond, a visiting professor in international relations at Ankara’s Bilkent University, told Deutsche Welle. Islamist influence  Tunisians may have brought about real change in their country  Analysts note that the absence of Islamists in the Tunisian protests is because Tunisia, unlike other Arab countries, has since its independence aggressively sought to ban Islamists from public life. "Most influential Tunisian Islamists now live abroad, while those who remain in Tunisia have been forced to form a coalition with unlikely secular and communist bedfellows. The nature of the opposition and the willingness of the Tunisian government to back down are not coincidental. If it had been clear that Islamist opposition figures were playing a large role in the current unrest, the government would likely have doubled down on repressive measures," says Michael Koplow, a doctoral candidate at Georgetown University, in a commentary in Foreign Policy. Islamists are nonetheless certain to exploit the widespread discontent and may benefit once protestors realize that change involves a lot more than toppling a corrupt and authoritarian leader. Ben Ali's departure has thrown Tunisia into turmoil. The country, at least for now has lost tourism, one of its main sources of foreign income. With the evacuation of thousands of European tourists, it will be some time before Tunisian tourism regains lost ground. The rise of secularism In a first sign of the reemergence of the Islamists, Rached Ghannouchi, the 69-year old leader of Tunisia's banned Nahda or Renaissance movement, announced on Sunday that he was returning to Tunisia from his 22 years in exile in London. Analysts say that Ghannouchi will encounter a country very different from the one he left. While he still may have supporters in Tunisia, he does not have an infrastructure and many of those Islamists that remained in the country have radicalized and are likely to see Ghannouchi as a spent force too willing to compromise. More importantly however, Tunisia's long-standing suppression of the Islamists has allowed secularism to build roots that many Tunisians will want to preserve. Tunisian-born Israeli sociologist Claude Sitbon notes that Tunisians on the Internet joked that Ghannouchi would be met at the airport by bikini-clad women. "Women have achieved an amazing status in Tunisia. They wear jeans in the street and bikinis on the beach; women are judges and ambassadors. Tunisians won't want to lose that," Sitbon says. Author: James M. Dorsey Editor: Rob Mudge


Spreading the word: Syria's digital revolution Just across the border, Syrians are doing what they can to help their countrymen fighting at home. That support is driven by the increasing use of social media which paved the way for change in Tunisia and Egypt. An oppressive regime, a brutal military and little promise of change: Unlike the Egyptian and Tunisian revolutions, the uprising in Syria has faced seemingly insurmountable odds from the very beginning. This was the revolution, analysts predicted, that would not last as President Bashar al-Assad's forces were simply too powerful. But more than 100 days after the first protests began in the streets of Daraa, the breadth and strength of the uprising stronger than as ever. And across the border in Turkey in refugee camps, Syrians wave flags, upload images of protests and try to help their countrymen while echoing the cries for change during popular Friday protests. "Syria has never had this kind of popular uprising with mass protests on the street, Radwan Ziadeh, executive director of the Syrian Center for Political and Strategic Studies in Washington DC, told Deutsche Welle.  "The Syrians right now have actually discovered the power of their voice, and the power of numbers." That power, say many protestors, is thanks in part to digital technology. As the revolutions in Tunisia and Egypt began earlier this year, Syrians, too, witnessed the images, voices and messages broadcast around the world. They carried forward the rallying cry into Syria in March, using cell phones and amateur cameras to document their own protests and inspire an ever-growing number of Syrians to join the movement. "Small committees and small groups were created in the beginning among networks of friends in the same neighborhood," said Malath Aumran, of the Local Coordination Committee, the network of Syrian activists coordinating the uprising, speaking from Beirut. "They have good communication on the ground and also they use the internet for communicating between the cities and towns." Revolution now As the uprising has swelled in number, so too has the activity on social media networks, where human rights organizations and demonstrators post daily updates and upload videos. The Facebook page, "The Syrian Revolution 2011," has amassed more than 200,000 followers, creating a forum for protestors and their supporters around the world to share the latest news and encourage protestors to continue. Youtube video uploads from Syria have exploded, showing reels of rallies, demonstrations and violence.  With no independent media reports, Syrians are using the web to show their videos of the violent protests One Syrian young man, who fled across the mountains into the Turkish town of Güvecci, brought a USB stick carrying dozens of short videos he had taken during protests in his hometown of Lazkiye. The young Syrian man, who asked that his name not be used because he is in Turkey illegally, says he is spreading those videos via the Internet and will continue to fight for freedom from Turkey. "This couldn't have happened earlier," he said of the mass protests. "Now we have cell phones and can talk to each other, and we know what is happening in other towns." In one clip, he keeps recording while he runs from a wave of bullets and advancing Syrian troops. In another, the lens focuses on a young Syrian named Mohamed, a friend, lying in a pool of blood after he was caught in the line of fire. "They have no regard for human life," said Abdul, referring to Syrian forces, who welcomed the Syrian and the other men into his home in Güvecci. Originally of Syrian descent, Abdul has lived in the Turkish town for several years. His home has become a central meeting place for a number of his families who have managed to escape safely across the border. There, they gather around the television to watch reports from Turkish television reporters and Arabic news networks. "Look at the Syrian channels, they keep showing regular shows," laughed Abdul while flipping through a series of Syrian news and information networks. "They act like nothing is going on." Sympathizers and friends in Turkish border towns have also helped, smuggling Turkish SIM cards across the border to Syrians hiding in makeshift refugee camps in the woods. Tapping into Turkish cell phone providers has allowed fleeing Syrians to send updates and messages without being tracked by authorities. Many there are planning their path to Turkey. "We know how modern Muslims live now thanks to the Internet," said the young Syrian, referring to Turkey. "And that's how we want to live." Raw images  Syrians are urging the world to take notice of their plight But more than mobilizing masses of protestors, the images and voices strewn across television and online have also served to waken Syrians from what some experts called a four-decade-long slumber: Faced with raw, unedited proof of President Assad's brutal tactics, many have been forced to take a stance, driving a deep wedge between the government's supporters and the rest. "The country is split now," said another young Syrian man who fled to Turkey. "Either you're with Assad or you're not." He said that those who are openly supporting Assad are doing it because they are afraid. "Those against him won't give in until we have freedom." Still, Syria's awakening has come at a heavy price: Human rights organizations estimate more than 1,300 people have died since the unrest began, and many more have been imprisoned. More than 12,000 Syrians now live in refugee camps on the in Turkey's Hatay province and have little prospect of leaving there, let alone returning home. While many Syrians have vowed to topple President Assad's regime, some say they, like Libyans, face a unique challenge. "What happened in Tunisia and Egypt was the leaders knew when their time was up," said Mohamed Hamadi, a 32-year-old lawyer who fled the town of Bdama with his wife and four children to Turkey where they now live in one of the five refugee camps. "Assad doesn't know that." Still, some experts believe the movement has grown too strong and the international pressure on Assad too great for protestors to back down any time soon. Already, Assad is negotiating on restrictions for non-Baath party members to participate in government, a turnaround from three months ago. "We are in the summer vacations now and the students are not at school and university, so it will extend further especially with the youth," said Wallid Saffour of the Syrian Human Rights Committee in London. "We expect that it will continue not only on Fridays but other days, morning and night, and this will have a very bad effect on the regime." Author: Sumi Somaskanda, Syrian-Turkish border Editor: Rob Mudge


Africa's revolutions need Marshall Plan The dire economic situation was one of the catalysts for the revolutions in Tunisia and Egypt. Now the West has to offer financial assistance, in order to prevent the fledgling democratization process from derailing. High youth unemployment, a lack of perspectives and economic problems were some of the key reasons for the revolutions in Tunisia and Egypt. But so far the economic situation has by no means improved and there is a real chance that things could even get worse, which could have dramatic consequences for the process of democratization. "We are still in an early phase of the transition," Mustapha Kamel Nabli, the governor of the Tunisian central bank, said during a visit to Berlin. He added that along with reforms, political change and new institutions money is also needed. "But there has been nothing, just peanuts." According to Nabli, Tunisia needs assistance right now, not in six months or two years. But Europeans on the whole, and Germany is no exception, have a hard time providing financial assistance. The situation is critical, argues Nabli who says that Tunisia is facing an immediate financial collapse. To get rid of nepotism requires a lot of money, he adds. Europe needs to to do more to help, says Nabli At the same time the government lacks revenues while expenditures are on the rise. The tourism sector is in shambles and the war in neighboring Libya has only made things worse. Tax revenue is down, but the general level of prices, including groceries, is rising. Massive aid worth billions is needed, says Nabli, but no one abroad feels responsible. Clear political message Words of solidarity are nice and warm the heart, but one can't eat them, adds Hisham Yussef, chief of staff for the general secretary of the Arab League who travelled to Berlin from Cairo. He also shares Nabli's goal to bring the immediate problems of the transformation process to the attention of German politicians. Of course the Arab League knows that help is always tied to certain conditions, he says. But he adds that the Europeans' decision to wait and see how the elections in Tunisia and Egypt turn out and how the countries develop is a big mistake. "It's not a question of the amount of money, but a question of political will," says Yussef. In the case of Greece, the necessary political will is there to prevent the country from going under, notes Yussef. But, he adds, in the case of Tunisia and Egypt a similar clear political message is missing. As a starting point, investment guarantees or the message for potential tourists that travelling to Tunisia and Egypt is safe again would help, says Yussef.  Political will to assist is lacking, says Yussef What's more, he argues, when the old regimes were in power, the money flow was intact, but now that the countries are moving in the right democratic direction, the money flow has dried up. German reaction Viktor Elbling, the head of department for economy and sustainable development in Germany's foreign office, admits it's a difficult situation. Elbling talks about the great sympathy for the people in Tunisia and Egypt and that it goes without saying that help is provided. He adds that foundations and non-governmental organizations are already helping the people on the streets. But on the political level Tunisia and Egypt at the moment are led by interim governments and no one knows exactly what will come next, says Elbling. A key question has to be answered first: "How can we work together with these governments? We have to consider very carefully where those funds will end up." That assessment is shared by Kerstin Müller, a member of parliament for the Greens. She travelled to Tunisia recently with the Foreign Affairs Committee of the German parliament and therefore knows first-hand how dire the situation is there. But she's also against simply opening up the money flow. If the aid money ends up in the wrong hands, it will only disappoint the people, adds Müller. What Europe also needs to do is open up its markets for products from Tunisia and Egypt, says Müller. "We don't want to see billions of euros flow and the countries end up being dependent on the Europeans, the US or the World Bank. We want to see economies created where people can find jobs." Rebuilding North Africa But economies take time to develop. Germany's reunification and period after World War II is often mentioned in connection with the current transformation process in North Africa. Back then, the economic development took decades. A similar general economic rebuilding program could probably help North Africa find its way into the future.  A Marshall Plan for Africa is unrealistic, argues Mülller Between 1948 and 1952 the US helped war-torn Western Europe with the so-called Marshall Plan. Loans, food, products and commodities were delivered. This aid package was worth $100 billion in today's dollars. Given the sheer size of that package, Kerstin Müller of the Greens thinks it is unrealistic to even contemplate such a program. More aid At their meeting in Deauville the world's richest industrial countries announced at the end of May that they wanted to provide $40 billion for the Arab Spring. However, the G8 countries itself plan to only contribute a quarter of that amount; the EU is supposed to come up with 1.24 billion euros. Not a huge amount when compared to the 160 billion euros that the countries in the Middle East and North Africa need in the next three years according to the International Monetary Fund. Could the revolutions in Tunisia and Egypt fail ultimately because of economic and financial problems? "We will succeed," says the Arab League's Hisham Yussef, however the governor of Tunisia's central bank Mustapha Kamel Nabli, doesn't sound as convinced when he says: "We know that 85 percent of the work that lies ahead must be done by us." All that is needed is some additional help, he adds, because if young people aren't provided with a perspective for the future, they will leave. And that, says Nabli, would be a catastrophe for the country. Author: Sabine Kinkartz/mik Editor: Rob Mudge


Tunisia mourns victims of 'Jasmine revolution' Three days of mourning have begun in Tunisia to remember the victims of the popular uprising that toppled former President Ben Ali. The mourning period is for the 78 people killed during protests. Tunisia started observing three days of national mourning on Friday for the dozens of people killed during violent protests, state television said. The uprising, which some have been calling the "Jasmine Revolution," ended the 23 year rule of former President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali. Cabinet ministers held the first meeting of the new cross-party government on Thursday night, marking fresh hope for a country which has been plagued by political unrest since mid-December. A government spokesman said security was a top priority, as well as preparing for new presidential elections and speeding up political reforms. "This meeting was historic. We were completely in agreement," said Higher Education Minister Ahmed Ibrahim, an opposition party leader who joined the coalition government after the ousting of Ben Ali. Amnesty for political prisoners The ministers decided to grant recognition to all banned political groups and adopt an amnesty for all political prisoners.  Government Ministers met for the first time on Thursday The amnesty will include people jailed for membership in the banned Islamic movement Ennahda. The new government promised to bring back any resources that had been spirited out of the country and to remove security forces stationed at universities, spokesman Tayyib Al Bakouchi said. The interim government was unveiled on Monday, after Ben Ali fled the country to Saudi Arabia in the face of a popular revolt. Calls for party ban Protests continued in the capital Tunis on Thursday. Police fired shots into the air to try to disperse hundreds of demonstrators demanding that ministers associated with the rule of Ben Ali leave the newly appointed government. Many Tunisians have been demanding that the RCD party be banned all together.  Violent protests in January ousted former President Ben Ali Meanwhile, 33 members of Ben Ali's family were arrested by Tunisian authorities on charges that related to accumulating part of the state's wealth. Images from state television showed jewelry, watches, and credit cards that had been confiscated from the family members, whose identities and relation to Ben Ali remain unknown. Earlier this week, Switzerland froze the assets of Ben Ali and his family. Author: Matt Zuvela, Catherine Bolsover, Charlotte Chelsom-Pill (AFP, AP, dpa, Reuters) Editor: Nancy Isenson


Tunisia votes in historic presidential elections Tunisians are voting for their first directly-elected president in a landmark poll, widely seen as a key step in the transition to democracy. Dictator Ben Ali was ousted in a popular uprising nearly four years ago. Voting got off to a peaceful start on Sunday, as Tunisians participated in their first free presidential elections since the 2011 revolution that ended the rule of Zine El Abidine Ben Ali and sparked Arab Spring revolts across the Middle East. "It's a historic day, the first presidential election in Tunisia held under advanced democratic norms," Prime Minister Mehdi Jomaa said. "God willing, it will be a great festival of democracy." About 5.2 million people are eligible to vote at the 11,000 polling stations across the country. Tens of thousands of police and troops were deployed amid security fears the poll could be disrupted by Islamist militants. Voting hours were reduced from 10 to five in some 50 localities close to the Algerian border where armed groups are active. Voters are being asked to choose from a list of 27 presidential candidates. Former Prime Minister Beji Caid Essebsi, 87, of the secularist Nidaa Tounes (Tunisia's Call) party, is considered the favorite. His party came first in general elections last month, winning 85 seats in the new 217-member parliament. Other names in the race include outgoing President Moncef Marzouki, leftist Hamma Hammami, and sole female candidate, magistrate Kalthoum Kannou. Model for the region The popular uprising that ended Ben Ali's dictatorship was sparked by Tunisian street vendor Mohamed Bouazizi, who set himself on fire on December 17, 2010 as a form of radical protest against the authorities. Until the revolution, Tunisia had only had two presidents - Habib Bourguiba, who led the Tunisian state after independence from France in 1956, and Ben Ali, who deposed him in a 1987 coup. Ben Ali's ouster inspired similar uprisings, known as the Arab Spring, in countries such as Egypt, Syria and neighboring Libya. But unlike those countries, Tunisia has remained relatively stable. It adopted a new constitution and, despite some setbacks, largely steered clear of violence. Challenges ahead Currently a caretaker government of independents led by Prime Minister Jomaa is overseeing the completion of Tunisia's transition to democracy, and its main priorities in the foreseeable future will be to tackle the struggling economy and high unemployment rate. In Tunisia, the main power resides with the prime minister, while the presidency is largely a symbolic post. In the leadup to Sunday's vote, Essebsi - who served under both former presidents - ran on a campaign of "state prestige," saying his skills were indispensible in the new government. His critics, however, claim he has authoritarian tendencies and could bring back the one-party state. Outgoing President Marzouki insists he is the only candidate capable of consolidating the gains of the uprising. Islamist party Ennahda, which came second in the recent parliamentary election, hasn't put a candidate forward, instead inviting its members to choose a president "who will guarantee democracy." Most analysts predict neither Essebsi nor Marzouki will win enough votes to secure an absolute majority. In this case, a run off vote would be held in December. Polling booths are scheduled to close at 6 p.m. (1700 UTC) in most localities. Preliminary results are expected on Tuesday. nm/kms (Reuters, AP, AFP)


Essebsi leads in first round of Tunisia vote Tunisian presidential candidate Beji Caid Essebsi is leading by six percentage points against incumbent Moncef Marzouki. Since neither candidate won a majority of the votes, they will face off in a run-off election. Tunisia's independent election commission declared the outcome of the weekend presidential election insufficient for naming a new leader because neither of the leading candidates had clinched the necessary 50 percent of the vote to win. Beji Caid Essebsi, veteran politician of the anti-Islamist party Nidaa Tounes, won roughly 39 percent of the votes, it said. The interim president, Moncef Marzouki, trailed six points behind, garnering only 33 percent of the ballots cast. The two leading candidates are to run again in a second race in December, but this time they must woo the voters who supported a number of other candidates, including third place winner Hamma Hammami, who won 8 percent of the vote. EU observers later declared the polls "pluralist and transparent," according to the news agency AFP. In Tunisia, the presidency is largely a symbolic role, with the prime minister entrusted with the bulk of the power. Nevertheless, Sunday's election marked a historic first for the North African country, which has been gradually moving toward democracy since the ouster of its ruler Zine El Abidine Ben Ali in 2011. Until the revolution, Tunisia had only had two presidents. Habib Bourguiba, who led the Tunisian state after independence from France in 1956, was the first, before being deposed by Ben Ali. The popular uprising that same year that led to Ben Ali's departure is considered the beginning of the Arab Spring. kms/mz (AP, AFP, Reuters)


Opinion: Europe must create jobs for transforming Arab countries Either European countries accept a greater influx from North Africans or they help improve the economic situation in the region, writes Juergen Wiemann of the German Society for International Cooperation. We are rubbing our eyes in disbelief. Only a few days ago we were following with anxious sympathy the early stages of what we hope will turn out to be successful revolutions in Tunisia and Egypt, and there were thousands of "boat people" landing on Italy's shores again. At this of all times, why don't these young people stay at home, enjoy their freedom and join in the reconstruction of the Tunisian economy? Similarities to breakdown of Eastern Bloc What was it like after the Berlin Wall came down in 1989? It is not without reason that the political changes in the Arab world are being likened to the radical change in the seemingly unshakable order of the whole Eastern Bloc at that time. Let us not forget that Chancellor Kohl was right in thinking that our East German compatriots would not be satisfied with the freedom they had won for themselves: they would want to seize the economic opportunities that the West's free market economy offered anyone willing to work hard. So it was a mere eight months after the fall of the Berlin Wall and even before German unification that the  Deutsche Mark was introduced in the new  Länder and a government assistance programme was set up for 17 million East Germans – on much the same scale as the official development assistance from the western industrialised countries to all the developing countries together (about 72 billion euros or 100 billion US dollars a year).  Dr. Juergen Wiemann Today, the first question European politicians ask is how to keep out the economic refugees from the other side of the Mediterranean. Of course, there is no plan to introduce the euro there: we have enough problems on the periphery of the euro zone as it is. Financial transfers of a similar magnitude to these countries would be neither conceivable nor wise, especially as the ground would first have to be laid for the money to be used appropriately. But even now Europe should be demonstrating rather more creativity in promoting the economic recovery of this new group of countries in transition. Open markets, create jobs, improve infrastructure For this there are three options. Option number one: Further opening of the European markets to all products, including farm products, which are still subject to import restrictions designed to protect (southern) European agricultural producers. Two: Direct investment by European companies should be used to take jobs to the people in the new transforming countries, so that they do not have to come to Europe to fill those jobs. Three: That will call for a substantial improvement in the environment in those countries, extending from a stable political order, through a proper legal system that works, to the training of workers. Involvement in this is a genuine task for development cooperation with these countries. The longer it takes for the economy in the North African countries to recover after the radical political changes, the more economic refugees will be beating a path to Europe. In a way the international migrations of capital and labor complement each other. The more jobs go offshore as a result of the export of capital to countries with a surplus of labour, the less the people in those countries will need to look for work in Europe. This is illustrated by the different strategies pursued by Germany and Japan at the time of their economic miracles. Germany's economic miracle was, of course, driven by the steady influx of skilled and motivated workers from the East, and when that source dried up, recruitment agreements were concluded with Italy, Spain, Greece and lastly, a few months after the Berlin Wall was erected in 1961, even with Turkey, despite doubts already being voiced about possible cultural incompatibilities. But demand from industry and the pressure it exerted were simply too strong. At the same time Japan presented a more elegant alternative. During its economic miracle Japan's industry similarly needed many more workers. But Japan wanted to be a country of immigration even less than Germany. Its industry therefore had, of necessity, to take the opposite course of moving production sites to the surrounding developing countries. This had advantages for both sides: Japanese industry could go on growing and, as wages in the peripheral countries were still lower, conquer world markets, while Taiwan, South Korea, Malaysia, Singapore, Thailand and, more recently, Vietnam and China themselves became successful exporting countries as a result of investment from Japan and, later, from the other OECD countries. Create jobs or accept a greater influx Compared to its Japanese counterpart, then, German industry was at a locational disadvantage, with Eastern Europe for all practical purposes closed to foreign investment until 1989 and the political and economic environment in today's emerging countries in the Arab world not very inviting either. In the meantime, German investment is again flowing to Eastern Europe, and the Arab world, too, might become more attractive if the processes of political transformation are successful and lead to long-term stability. Until then a “green card” programme coordinated and controlled by the EU should be set up to give unemployed young North Africans the chance to try out their abilities and skills in Europe. Some of them may one day be ambassadors for German companies in search of partners and investment opportunities in their home countries. And it should not be forgotten that their remittances would immediately help to restore economic health after the confusion of change. So we have a choice: either we give our neighbors in North Africa more economic opportunities through trade and investment, or we experience a greater influx of people from these countries. Completely shutting ourselves off is neither wise nor practicable – a wall cannot be built in the Mediterranean, nor can all the boat people be sent back out to sea. Only if we offer these young societies the hand of cooperation will it be possible to avoid cultural clashes and worse. A European vision may then even come true: one day solar and wind energy could be "harvested" in the Sahara and transported to Europe. German firms are involved in this, and German development cooperation will play an important part. The opportunity should be seized to improve the political and societal conditions in the North African countries for implementing these projects one day to the benefit of both sides, however utopian they may appear today. Author: Dr. Juergen Wiemann Dr. Wiemann works for the department "Economic Development and Employment – Multilateral Trading System and Development Cooperation" at the German Society for International Cooperation (GIZ). He is the former Deputy Director of the German Development Institute (DIE). The column reflects his own personal opinion. Editor: Nina Haase


Opinion: Congratulations, Tunisia! Sunday's Presidential elections were yet another step on Tunisia's path to a democratic future. All the same, Tunisians need patience, says German ARD correspondent Stefan Ehlert. Congratulations Tunisia! No matter who is officially announced as the winner in a few days' time, the second peaceful vote in four weeks has shown that this country is headed in the right direction - and it looks like it's the only one in the Arab region. Libya is falling apart in a clan war, Syria is embroiled in a civil war, Egypt has reverted to a military dictatorship and Yemen is sinking into chaos. Only one small nation in North Africa got its act together, and that's Tunisia. The appalling example of its Arab neighbors may have helped: almost everyone in Tunis has recognized the value of compromise for a democracy, even Tunisia's moderate Ennahda Islamists. They realized, though late, that they can't push through their idea of an Islamic state with a supreme religious authority in Tunisia any time soon. Agonizing interim period Tunisians have had to muster incredible patience in the past four dramatic years. An entire country suffered an agonizingly long wait, during which very little or nothing was decided at any level at all. People have been shocked by the murder of two leftist politicians and numerous casualties due to terrorist attacks. Tourism never got off the ground, economic growth slumped, garbage collection collapsed. Prices have risen, and so has unemployment, in particular among young people. Many turned their backs on politics and the state as a result. Thousands travelled to Syria and Iraq to enlist as Islamist fighters, and every year, thousands attempt to flee to Europe. The dividend of the revolution - many people had expected quite something else. Stefan Ehlert is a correspondent for Germany's public ARD broadcaster All the same, the situation calls for recognition! Tunisia can look back on a year of progress. In January, the country got what must be the most progressive constitution in the Arab world: secularized, reasonably parliamentarian and with a focus on women's equal rights. Parliamentary elections in October were free and peaceful, which is an exception in Africa and not a given in many other countries, either. Split political elite Yet over the past weeks, the election campaign for the state's top job has once again shown the split within Tunisia's political class and how little the protagonists can agree on common ideas and programs. How else can one explain the emergence of 27 candidates? It's no wonder that Tunisians are tired of politics. Only about 5.3 million of eight million Tunisians eligible to vote actually registered. The party that manages to garner more than half of those votes is still only backed by about one third of the voting population. The state, however, must be there for everyone - otherwise it is at threat of failing. Just look at the rest of the Arab world. In the eyes of the people, a state enjoys authority only as long as it can actually offer the promised services, the necessary safety, constitutional legality, infrastructure and the social framework of a modern-day state. It remains to be seen whether the Tunisian model proves successful in practice, whether parliament will in fact pass necessary legislation and whether the government will run the country in an effective manner. Tunisia now faces the difficult phase of forming a government. Neither side has a majority in parliament; compromise and the willingness to talk are called for once again. The Tunisian people's much vaunted patience continues to be tested. Much has been achieved but even now, we should not expect too much.


French far right poised to gain from wave of Tunisian migrants The wave of Tunisian immigrants that arrived in France last week shouldn't plan on getting too cozy. The new leader of the National Front is poised to capitalize on what she says is an immigration crisis. French police say they have arrested some 100 Tunisians who landed on the Italian island of Lampedusa last week as they tried to enter France. The arrested immigrants, each carrying a document provided by the Italian authorities, are being held in detention centers across southeastern France. Should these immigrants request political asylum, their demands would more than likely be turned down, and France would be under no obligation to allow them to stay. On Friday, French Secretary of State for European Affairs Laurent Wauquiez made it clear that immigrants from Tunisia should expect no special treatment. "The Interior Ministry will examine on a case by case basis those who qualify for the right to immigration. Those cases can only be very marginal," Wauquiez told a news conference. Good news for the National Front  Marine Le Pen is the daughter of far-right firebrand Jean Marie Le Pen  The government is taking a hard line on these immigrants - but that is not preventing Marine Le Pen, the new leader of the far right National Front party, from making political capital out of what she says is the beginning of a new immigration crisis. In an interview with French public radio on Friday, Le Pen said the "great wave of migrants" was one of the consequences of the revolutions taking place in the Arab world. "We have to reform our immigration policy and stop the system that's pumping immigrants into our country. That means revoking the automatic right of anyone born here to French nationality and stopping the insanely easy access to social security benefit, housing benefit, retirement pensions and free schooling," Le Pen said. According to an opinion poll published Friday, if presidential elections were held tomorrow, 26 percent would vote for Socialist hopeful Dominique Strauss-Khan, 23 percent for incumbent president Nicolas Sarkozy and 21 percent for Le Pen, meaning France would be very close to selecting the far right leader to go to the second round head-to-head against the Socialist candidate. Author: John Laurenson /smh Editor: Andreas Illmer


Tunisian police unleash tear gas as government arrests TV boss In the Tunisian capital, Tunis, protesters camped out in front of Prime Minister Mohamed Ghannouchi's office before being broken up by police on Monday. The protesters demanded the resignation of the interim government Police in the Tunisian capital, Tunis, fired tear gas at anti-government protesters on Monday, as the country's interim government struggled to restore order in the city. Hundreds of demonstrators defied an overnight curfew and camped out in front of Prime Minister Mohamed Ghannouchi's office to force the government to resign. Some threw stones and broke windows in the nearby Finance Ministry. "We will stay here until the government resigns and runs away like [ousted President Zine El Abidine] Ben Ali," said 22-year-old student Othmene. Many protesters came from the town of Sidi Bouzid, where the self-immolation of a fruit vendor triggered unrest that led Ben Ali to flee the country to Saudi Arabia on January 14. Protestors held up pictures of people killed during the former president's authoritarian rule. The ongoing violence compelled former colonial power France to offer emergency aid to the embattled Tunisian government on Monday, with French President Nicolas Sarkozy commenting the measures should "be put into place as quickly as possible." Ghannouchi and other ministers have come under intense pressure to step down "I have asked [Prime Minister] Francois Fillon to prepare measures that will be presented to Tunisia to help the transitional government, especially on the economic front," Sarkozy told a news conference. Since Ben Ali's ouster, Tunis and other cities have seen daily protests against an interim government, in which key figures are holdovers from Ben Ali's rule, including Ghannouchi. TV boss arrested Meanwhile, the owner of private television channel Hannibal TV and relative of Ben Ali, Larbi Nasra, was arrested for treason on Sunday. In a government statement, officials accused him of promoting the former president's return and "using the channel to abort the youth's revolution, spread confusion, incite strife and broadcast false information." The channel was briefly taken off air Sunday, but resumed broadcasting within a few hours. On Saturday, thousands rallied in Tunis and other cities, while hundreds of protesters launched a march on the capital from Sidi Bouzid. The protests are supported by the main union in Tunisia, the UGTT, which refuses to recognize the interim government because of its links to Ben Ali's regime. Since Ben Ali's departure, the interim government has removed restrictions on importing foreign films and literature, the media and the release of political prisoners.  The media was tightly controlled under Ben Ali's rule  The interim government has vowed to organize Tunisia's first democratic elections since gaining independence from France in 1956. Calls for calm As the civil unrest in the country drags on, some in Tunisia are calling for a return to calm. A strike by teachers has kept many schools shut, despite government orders to reopen them, prompting some criticism from parents of students. "This strike is irresponsible, our children our being held hostage," said Lamia Bouassida, one of a dozen parents who had come to a school in central Tunis to check if it was open. Former Prime Minister Rachid Sfar wrote in an editorial for the daily Tunisian newspaper La Presse that the revolution had gone far enough. "We have to make the democratic process real and irreversible and at the same time guard against the violence and anarchy that threaten our country," he wrote. Authors: Nicole Goebel, Andrew Bowen (Reuters, AFP, AP) Editor: Martin Kuebler


Africalink on Air - 29 June 2012 Verdict postponed in trial of Rwandan opposition politician+++Western diplomats visit Zimbabwe diamond mines+++Tunisian bloggers in exile are unhappy with their home country's post-revolution course


Africalink on Air - 29 June 2012 Verdict postponed in trial of Rwandan opposition politician+++Western diplomats visit Zimbabwe diamond mines+++Tunisian bloggers in exile are unhappy with their home country's post-revolution course


Death by fire: Self-immolation in the Arab World As the political upheaval that began in Tunisia spreads from Egypt to Libya, dozens of people across the Arab world have publicly set themselves on fire. Are these self-immolations acts of despair or political protest? Last December, a young unemployed street vendor named Mohamed Bouazizi doused himself in paint thinner and set himself on fire outside of the municipal building in the remote Tunisian town Sidi Bouzid. He died of his self-inflicted wounds weeks later. Bouazizi's self-immolation, the act of burning oneself to death, became the symbol of a popular uprising that toppled Tunisia's authoritarian President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali. Inspired by events in Tunisia, the Arab street protests subsequently forced Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak to step down and have now placed Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi under siege. As revolutionary fervor engulfs the Arab world, dozens of people from Morocco to Yemen have lit themselves on fire in front of municipal buildings, parliaments, and presidential palaces. Are these gruesome suicides acts of personal desperation triggered by hopeless social conditions, or are they a form of political protest designed to expose societal injustice and incite popular uprisings? Life not worth living Werner Ruf - an expert on North Africa with the University of Kassel in Germany - told Deutsche Welle that although Bouazizi's suicide focused international attention on self-immolation, the practice had become increasingly common in Tunisia prior to his death. According to Ruf, up to 15 percent of the patients in the special clinic for burn victims in Tunis are victims of self immolation. "The fundamental problem is that there's no way to live with human dignity there," Ruf said. "Consider that every day hundreds of people drown trying to cross from Algeria, Tunisia and Morocco on one side to Spain on the other. These kids know how dangerous that is, that they have a 5 percent chance of surviving the journey." "But their lives are no longer worth anything to them," Ruf continued. "Either I get out, or I die. Whether I drown in the ocean or die at home doesn't matter. With this kind of despair, self-immolation is just one more way to end an undignified life without prospects for the future." In Bouazizi's case, the 26-year-old street vendor set himself on fire after a run in with the authorities. A police officer tried to confiscate Bouazizi's produce cart because he lacked the appropriate permit. When Bouazizi refused to cooperate, the officer slapped him. Ruf believes that Bouazizi's public humiliation at the hands of the state pushed him and the Tunisian people over the edge. "Everywhere people are treated like dirt by the police, the authorities and in the health centers," he said. "People are not treated like human beings. It's no coincidence that in both the big opposition movements, in Egypt and Tunisia, people are demanding their human dignity, to be treated like human beings." Martyr and victim Bouazizi's quickly became a martyr to the political opposition. Protesters rallied around him as a symbol of the need for change as they took to the streets. Public pressure even forced then President Ben Ali to visit Bouazizi at his hospital bedside. Ultimately, the pressure became so great that Ben Ali fled the country. Although Bouazizi's suicide became an important symbol, Adam Lankford of the University of Alabama does not believe the street vendor had a political motivation. Lankford, who began to examine self-immolation after investigating the psychology suicide bombers, told Deutsche Welle that activists later interpreted Bouazizi's suicide as an act of protest. "In these kinds of tumultuous times people want heroes," said Lankford, a professor of criminology. "Frankly, they would prefer to see Bouazizi as a hero, as someone who is willing to sacrifice himself for the greater good rather than the reality which may be that he was a tragic victim." But Michael Biggs, sociology professor at the University of Oxford, believes that Bouazizi thought about more than his own despair. Biggs, who studies self-immolation as an act of protest, says Bouazizi at least implicitly sent a political message when he lit himself on fire in front of the town municipal building. "Talk is cheap," Biggs said. "There are lots of protests and causes out there, people saying that things are unjust. But if you're willing to die that gives you a very credible signal that this isn't just talk about injustice but that this is something that I think is so terrible that I'd rather die."  Massive protests erupted after Bouazizi's death Copycat effect Since Bouazizi's suicide, dozens of people from Morocco to Yemen have lit themselves on fire in public places. These self-immolations usually occur in front of government buildings or other public places and are often carried out by financially strapped people who have been denied services by indifferent bureaucracies. In Egypt, a restaurant owner lit himself on fire in front of the parliament building in Cairo after being denied subsidized bread. A lawyer did the same a day later to protest rising prices. An Algerian woman in a small town southwest of Algiers tried to set herself in flames in front of a municipal building after being denied housing aid. And in the West African country of Mauritania, a man tried to light himself on fire in front of the Senate and presidential buildings in protest against poor governance. These incidents - and many others - all happened within days of each other in January as the political unrest, which began in Tunisia, began to spread across North Africa. Sociology professor Biggs attributes the spate of self-immolations to Bouazizi's suicide in December and the subsequent successful revolution in Tunisia. "One single person's action can make a huge difference," Biggs said. "If we could go back and stop Bouazizi from killing himself then I'm sure there would have been no subsequent suicides or self-immolations in North Africa." "It was precisely because his action was spectacular and spectacularly successful. It seemed to bring about a train of events that led to the overthrow of the regime." Un-Islamic act According to Bigg's, the practice of self-immolation has traditionally been uncommon in the Muslim world. Islam has a strong prohibition against suicide and desecrating the human body, both of which occur during self-immolation. Yet Muslims continue to set themselves onn fire. As recent as late February, the Algerian newspaper El-Watan reported that a 25-year-old man burnt himself to death in a town east of Algiers to protest problems with his identity card.  Under public pressure, then-President Ben Ali visited Bouazizi in the hospital  "These religious sanctions are being overruled by perhaps desperation or a belief that their political regime is intolerable," Biggs said. "And of course that will in some sense change the culture a little bit. Maybe it will become a more common form of tactic in the Middle East." How can this spate of self-burnings, which contradict both religious and secular conventions, be explained? Lankford, the criminal justice professor, says that ultimately the answer is in the eye of the beholder. "Really regardless of what the individual motivation is, it's fine for us to find them tragic, inspiring, or moving or anything else," Lankford said. "That's legitimate, regardless of the intention." Author: Spencer Kimball Editor: Rob Mudge


Readers add their voices to debate on Libya Should a no-fly zone be created? Or should the international community render aid? Or simply look the other way? Our readers wrote in with their opinions. The following comments reflect the views of DW-WORLD.DE readers. DW-WORLD.DE reserves the right to edit for length and appropriateness of content. 

Gadhafi warns of 'bloody war' in Libya as fighting continues 
I sure hope the US doesn't become involved in Libya. But, being that they are ruled by a dictator and there are numerous human rights violations, I wouldn't be surprised if we do. The whole Middle East is a boiling cauldron. I think they should sort out their own problems, but can't, and too many people are already suffering as a result. -- Eddie, US 

The West can't say no if Libyans call for a no-fly zone 
I don't think a "no-fly zone" would be a good idea. Outside support to the opposition, such as supplies, advance warning systems and military weapons with training would be the best approach. Any invasion of the country by military force would be criticized by many, including some people in Libya. -- Garry, Canada 

Libyan no-fly zone plans gather momentum 
It will be total madness if the world chooses to attack Libya. How could the West choose to attack only one faction? Libya is a sovereign country and should be left to deal with its internal affairs. -- Harruna, Ghana 

Libyan rebels face new attacks by Gadhafi forces 
When people realize their democratic rights, nothing can stop them - not even bullets. Following the dramatic removal of both the Tunisian and Egyptian dictators, Gadhafi will be fried in the same pan, as the working and poor masses seek to remove repressive regimes out and forever. -- Mutua, Kenya 

Analysts remain skeptical about plans for a no-fly zone 
No, this strategy did not work well in Iraq and Libya is a much larger country. Also, Gadhafi might use this to his own advantage, by blaming the West, and the US in particular, for making war against the Libyan people thereby gaining a propaganda victory. -- G., Canada 

Germany

advocates tougher Libya sanctions amid escalating violence 
It's interesting that as long as a dictator does what the mighty dictator demands, it's okay, but as soon as they get older, less adaptable, no longer needed, out they go, and others jump on the bandwagon, like with Iraq, Egypt and now Libya. Out with the old, in with the new. It's all for the greed of oil. -- Marta, US 
First, I would like to congratulate world leaders for their great concern for Libya and other African countries. These leaders are working hard to make sure the situation in Libya gets back to normal and the suffering of Libyans stops. I am asking them to take actions and impose tougher sanctions to Moammar Gadhafi to rescue the lives of innocent people in Libya. I am afraid more delay will cost more lives. I also condemn the silence of African leaders, to them it's like there is nothing happening. They have been all quiet. Their silence proves to the world that most African rulers got to power through non-democratic and unfair elections. I call upon African leaders to wake up, open their eyes and face reality, otherwise, what is in Libya will soon happen in their countries. It has happened in Tunisia and Egypt, now we see it in Libya. They have to change. -- Emmanuel, Tanzania 
What gives Germany the right to advocate anything? What Germany are you talking about? Germany is still an occupied country! Just because Germany likes foreign occupation (65 years is not enough?) it thinks that other nations love that too? -- Judutarrak, US 
It is becoming more and more imperative for Germany to refrain from giving advice in international matters, such as North Africa and others. Germany's forte is education, innovation and quality of production, as well as basic research from the deep oceans to outer space through all related sciences. Germany must understand that almost all problems popping up now are the consequence of colonialism, slavery and globalization, meaning exploitation through whatever means with the intention for future democracies under a military umbrella. -- HRF, Antigua and Barbuda 
Compiled by Stuart Tiffen
Editor: Michael Lawton Gadhafi warns of 'bloody war' in Libya as fighting continues 
I sure hope the US doesn't become involved in Libya. But, being that they are ruled by a dictator and there are numerous human rights violations, I wouldn't be surprised if we do. The whole Middle East is a boiling cauldron. I think they should sort out their own problems, but can't, and too many people are already suffering as a result. -- Eddie, US 

The West can't say no if Libyans call for a no-fly zone 
I don't think a "no-fly zone" would be a good idea. Outside support to the opposition, such as supplies, advance warning systems and military weapons with training would be the best approach. Any invasion of the country by military force would be criticized by many, including some people in Libya. -- Garry, Canada 

Libyan no-fly zone plans gather momentum 
It will be total madness if the world chooses to attack Libya. How could the West choose to attack only one faction? Libya is a sovereign country and should be left to deal with its internal affairs. -- Harruna, Ghana 

Libyan rebels face new attacks by Gadhafi forces 
When people realize their democratic rights, nothing can stop them - not even bullets. Following the dramatic removal of both the Tunisian and Egyptian dictators, Gadhafi will be fried in the same pan, as the working and poor masses seek to remove repressive regimes out and forever. -- Mutua, Kenya 

Analysts remain skeptical about plans for a no-fly zone 
No, this strategy did not work well in Iraq and Libya is a much larger country. Also, Gadhafi might use this to his own advantage, by blaming the West, and the US in particular, for making war against the Libyan people thereby gaining a propaganda victory. -- G., Canada 

Germany

advocates tougher Libya sanctions amid escalating violence 
It's interesting that as long as a dictator does what the mighty dictator demands, it's okay, but as soon as they get older, less adaptable, no longer needed, out they go, and others jump on the bandwagon, like with Iraq, Egypt and now Libya. Out with the old, in with the new. It's all for the greed of oil. -- Marta, US 
First, I would like to congratulate world leaders for their great concern for Libya and other African countries. These leaders are working hard to make sure the situation in Libya gets back to normal and the suffering of Libyans stops. I am asking them to take actions and impose tougher sanctions to Moammar Gadhafi to rescue the lives of innocent people in Libya. I am afraid more delay will cost more lives. I also condemn the silence of African leaders, to them it's like there is nothing happening. They have been all quiet. Their silence proves to the world that most African rulers got to power through non-democratic and unfair elections. I call upon African leaders to wake up, open their eyes and face reality, otherwise, what is in Libya will soon happen in their countries. It has happened in Tunisia and Egypt, now we see it in Libya. They have to change. -- Emmanuel, Tanzania 
What gives Germany the right to advocate anything? What Germany are you talking about? Germany is still an occupied country! Just because Germany likes foreign occupation (65 years is not enough?) it thinks that other nations love that too? -- Judutarrak, US 
It is becoming more and more imperative for Germany to refrain from giving advice in international matters, such as North Africa and others. Germany's forte is education, innovation and quality of production, as well as basic research from the deep oceans to outer space through all related sciences. Germany must understand that almost all problems popping up now are the consequence of colonialism, slavery and globalization, meaning exploitation through whatever means with the intention for future democracies under a military umbrella. -- HRF, Antigua and Barbuda 
Compiled by Stuart Tiffen
Editor: Michael Lawton I sure hope the US doesn't become involved in Libya. But, being that they are ruled by a dictator and there are numerous human rights violations, I wouldn't be surprised if we do. The whole Middle East is a boiling cauldron. I think they should sort out their own problems, but can't, and too many people are already suffering as a result. -- Eddie, US 

The West can't say no if Libyans call for a no-fly zone 
I don't think a "no-fly zone" would be a good idea. Outside support to the opposition, such as supplies, advance warning systems and military weapons with training would be the best approach. Any invasion of the country by military force would be criticized by many, including some people in Libya. -- Garry, Canada 

Libyan no-fly zone plans gather momentum 
It will be total madness if the world chooses to attack Libya. How could the West choose to attack only one faction? Libya is a sovereign country and should be left to deal with its internal affairs. -- Harruna, Ghana 

Libyan rebels face new attacks by Gadhafi forces 
When people realize their democratic rights, nothing can stop them - not even bullets. Following the dramatic removal of both the Tunisian and Egyptian dictators, Gadhafi will be fried in the same pan, as the working and poor masses seek to remove repressive regimes out and forever. -- Mutua, Kenya 

Analysts remain skeptical about plans for a no-fly zone 
No, this strategy did not work well in Iraq and Libya is a much larger country. Also, Gadhafi might use this to his own advantage, by blaming the West, and the US in particular, for making war against the Libyan people thereby gaining a propaganda victory. -- G., Canada 

Germany

advocates tougher Libya sanctions amid escalating violence 
It's interesting that as long as a dictator does what the mighty dictator demands, it's okay, but as soon as they get older, less adaptable, no longer needed, out they go, and others jump on the bandwagon, like with Iraq, Egypt and now Libya. Out with the old, in with the new. It's all for the greed of oil. -- Marta, US 
First, I would like to congratulate world leaders for their great concern for Libya and other African countries. These leaders are working hard to make sure the situation in Libya gets back to normal and the suffering of Libyans stops. I am asking them to take actions and impose tougher sanctions to Moammar Gadhafi to rescue the lives of innocent people in Libya. I am afraid more delay will cost more lives. I also condemn the silence of African leaders, to them it's like there is nothing happening. They have been all quiet. Their silence proves to the world that most African rulers got to power through non-democratic and unfair elections. I call upon African leaders to wake up, open their eyes and face reality, otherwise, what is in Libya will soon happen in their countries. It has happened in Tunisia and Egypt, now we see it in Libya. They have to change. -- Emmanuel, Tanzania 
What gives Germany the right to advocate anything? What Germany are you talking about? Germany is still an occupied country! Just because Germany likes foreign occupation (65 years is not enough?) it thinks that other nations love that too? -- Judutarrak, US 
It is becoming more and more imperative for Germany to refrain from giving advice in international matters, such as North Africa and others. Germany's forte is education, innovation and quality of production, as well as basic research from the deep oceans to outer space through all related sciences. Germany must understand that almost all problems popping up now are the consequence of colonialism, slavery and globalization, meaning exploitation through whatever means with the intention for future democracies under a military umbrella. -- HRF, Antigua and Barbuda 
Compiled by Stuart Tiffen
Editor: Michael Lawton The West can't say no if Libyans call for a no-fly zone 
I don't think a "no-fly zone" would be a good idea. Outside support to the opposition, such as supplies, advance warning systems and military weapons with training would be the best approach. Any invasion of the country by military force would be criticized by many, including some people in Libya. -- Garry, Canada 

Libyan no-fly zone plans gather momentum 
It will be total madness if the world chooses to attack Libya. How could the West choose to attack only one faction? Libya is a sovereign country and should be left to deal with its internal affairs. -- Harruna, Ghana 

Libyan rebels face new attacks by Gadhafi forces 
When people realize their democratic rights, nothing can stop them - not even bullets. Following the dramatic removal of both the Tunisian and Egyptian dictators, Gadhafi will be fried in the same pan, as the working and poor masses seek to remove repressive regimes out and forever. -- Mutua, Kenya 

Analysts remain skeptical about plans for a no-fly zone 
No, this strategy did not work well in Iraq and Libya is a much larger country. Also, Gadhafi might use this to his own advantage, by blaming the West, and the US in particular, for making war against the Libyan people thereby gaining a propaganda victory. -- G., Canada 

Germany

advocates tougher Libya sanctions amid escalating violence 
It's interesting that as long as a dictator does what the mighty dictator demands, it's okay, but as soon as they get older, less adaptable, no longer needed, out they go, and others jump on the bandwagon, like with Iraq, Egypt and now Libya. Out with the old, in with the new. It's all for the greed of oil. -- Marta, US 
First, I would like to congratulate world leaders for their great concern for Libya and other African countries. These leaders are working hard to make sure the situation in Libya gets back to normal and the suffering of Libyans stops. I am asking them to take actions and impose tougher sanctions to Moammar Gadhafi to rescue the lives of innocent people in Libya. I am afraid more delay will cost more lives. I also condemn the silence of African leaders, to them it's like there is nothing happening. They have been all quiet. Their silence proves to the world that most African rulers got to power through non-democratic and unfair elections. I call upon African leaders to wake up, open their eyes and face reality, otherwise, what is in Libya will soon happen in their countries. It has happened in Tunisia and Egypt, now we see it in Libya. They have to change. -- Emmanuel, Tanzania 
What gives Germany the right to advocate anything? What Germany are you talking about? Germany is still an occupied country! Just because Germany likes foreign occupation (65 years is not enough?) it thinks that other nations love that too? -- Judutarrak, US 
It is becoming more and more imperative for Germany to refrain from giving advice in international matters, such as North Africa and others. Germany's forte is education, innovation and quality of production, as well as basic research from the deep oceans to outer space through all related sciences. Germany must understand that almost all problems popping up now are the consequence of colonialism, slavery and globalization, meaning exploitation through whatever means with the intention for future democracies under a military umbrella. -- HRF, Antigua and Barbuda 
Compiled by Stuart Tiffen
Editor: Michael Lawton I don't think a "no-fly zone" would be a good idea. Outside support to the opposition, such as supplies, advance warning systems and military weapons with training would be the best approach. Any invasion of the country by military force would be criticized by many, including some people in Libya. -- Garry, Canada 

Libyan no-fly zone plans gather momentum 
It will be total madness if the world chooses to attack Libya. How could the West choose to attack only one faction? Libya is a sovereign country and should be left to deal with its internal affairs. -- Harruna, Ghana 

Libyan rebels face new attacks by Gadhafi forces 
When people realize their democratic rights, nothing can stop them - not even bullets. Following the dramatic removal of both the Tunisian and Egyptian dictators, Gadhafi will be fried in the same pan, as the working and poor masses seek to remove repressive regimes out and forever. -- Mutua, Kenya 

Analysts remain skeptical about plans for a no-fly zone 
No, this strategy did not work well in Iraq and Libya is a much larger country. Also, Gadhafi might use this to his own advantage, by blaming the West, and the US in particular, for making war against the Libyan people thereby gaining a propaganda victory. -- G., Canada 

Germany

advocates tougher Libya sanctions amid escalating violence 
It's interesting that as long as a dictator does what the mighty dictator demands, it's okay, but as soon as they get older, less adaptable, no longer needed, out they go, and others jump on the bandwagon, like with Iraq, Egypt and now Libya. Out with the old, in with the new. It's all for the greed of oil. -- Marta, US 
First, I would like to congratulate world leaders for their great concern for Libya and other African countries. These leaders are working hard to make sure the situation in Libya gets back to normal and the suffering of Libyans stops. I am asking them to take actions and impose tougher sanctions to Moammar Gadhafi to rescue the lives of innocent people in Libya. I am afraid more delay will cost more lives. I also condemn the silence of African leaders, to them it's like there is nothing happening. They have been all quiet. Their silence proves to the world that most African rulers got to power through non-democratic and unfair elections. I call upon African leaders to wake up, open their eyes and face reality, otherwise, what is in Libya will soon happen in their countries. It has happened in Tunisia and Egypt, now we see it in Libya. They have to change. -- Emmanuel, Tanzania 
What gives Germany the right to advocate anything? What Germany are you talking about? Germany is still an occupied country! Just because Germany likes foreign occupation (65 years is not enough?) it thinks that other nations love that too? -- Judutarrak, US 
It is becoming more and more imperative for Germany to refrain from giving advice in international matters, such as North Africa and others. Germany's forte is education, innovation and quality of production, as well as basic research from the deep oceans to outer space through all related sciences. Germany must understand that almost all problems popping up now are the consequence of colonialism, slavery and globalization, meaning exploitation through whatever means with the intention for future democracies under a military umbrella. -- HRF, Antigua and Barbuda 
Compiled by Stuart Tiffen
Editor: Michael Lawton Libyan no-fly zone plans gather momentum 
It will be total madness if the world chooses to attack Libya. How could the West choose to attack only one faction? Libya is a sovereign country and should be left to deal with its internal affairs. -- Harruna, Ghana 

Libyan rebels face new attacks by Gadhafi forces 
When people realize their democratic rights, nothing can stop them - not even bullets. Following the dramatic removal of both the Tunisian and Egyptian dictators, Gadhafi will be fried in the same pan, as the working and poor masses seek to remove repressive regimes out and forever. -- Mutua, Kenya 

Analysts remain skeptical about plans for a no-fly zone 
No, this strategy did not work well in Iraq and Libya is a much larger country. Also, Gadhafi might use this to his own advantage, by blaming the West, and the US in particular, for making war against the Libyan people thereby gaining a propaganda victory. -- G., Canada 

Germany

advocates tougher Libya sanctions amid escalating violence 
It's interesting that as long as a dictator does what the mighty dictator demands, it's okay, but as soon as they get older, less adaptable, no longer needed, out they go, and others jump on the bandwagon, like with Iraq, Egypt and now Libya. Out with the old, in with the new. It's all for the greed of oil. -- Marta, US 
First, I would like to congratulate world leaders for their great concern for Libya and other African countries. These leaders are working hard to make sure the situation in Libya gets back to normal and the suffering of Libyans stops. I am asking them to take actions and impose tougher sanctions to Moammar Gadhafi to rescue the lives of innocent people in Libya. I am afraid more delay will cost more lives. I also condemn the silence of African leaders, to them it's like there is nothing happening. They have been all quiet. Their silence proves to the world that most African rulers got to power through non-democratic and unfair elections. I call upon African leaders to wake up, open their eyes and face reality, otherwise, what is in Libya will soon happen in their countries. It has happened in Tunisia and Egypt, now we see it in Libya. They have to change. -- Emmanuel, Tanzania 
What gives Germany the right to advocate anything? What Germany are you talking about? Germany is still an occupied country! Just because Germany likes foreign occupation (65 years is not enough?) it thinks that other nations love that too? -- Judutarrak, US 
It is becoming more and more imperative for Germany to refrain from giving advice in international matters, such as North Africa and others. Germany's forte is education, innovation and quality of production, as well as basic research from the deep oceans to outer space through all related sciences. Germany must understand that almost all problems popping up now are the consequence of colonialism, slavery and globalization, meaning exploitation through whatever means with the intention for future democracies under a military umbrella. -- HRF, Antigua and Barbuda 
Compiled by Stuart Tiffen
Editor: Michael Lawton It will be total madness if the world chooses to attack Libya. How could the West choose to attack only one faction? Libya is a sovereign country and should be left to deal with its internal affairs. -- Harruna, Ghana 

Libyan rebels face new attacks by Gadhafi forces 
When people realize their democratic rights, nothing can stop them - not even bullets. Following the dramatic removal of both the Tunisian and Egyptian dictators, Gadhafi will be fried in the same pan, as the working and poor masses seek to remove repressive regimes out and forever. -- Mutua, Kenya 

Analysts remain skeptical about plans for a no-fly zone 
No, this strategy did not work well in Iraq and Libya is a much larger country. Also, Gadhafi might use this to his own advantage, by blaming the West, and the US in particular, for making war against the Libyan people thereby gaining a propaganda victory. -- G., Canada 

Germany

advocates tougher Libya sanctions amid escalating violence 
It's interesting that as long as a dictator does what the mighty dictator demands, it's okay, but as soon as they get older, less adaptable, no longer needed, out they go, and others jump on the bandwagon, like with Iraq, Egypt and now Libya. Out with the old, in with the new. It's all for the greed of oil. -- Marta, US 
First, I would like to congratulate world leaders for their great concern for Libya and other African countries. These leaders are working hard to make sure the situation in Libya gets back to normal and the suffering of Libyans stops. I am asking them to take actions and impose tougher sanctions to Moammar Gadhafi to rescue the lives of innocent people in Libya. I am afraid more delay will cost more lives. I also condemn the silence of African leaders, to them it's like there is nothing happening. They have been all quiet. Their silence proves to the world that most African rulers got to power through non-democratic and unfair elections. I call upon African leaders to wake up, open their eyes and face reality, otherwise, what is in Libya will soon happen in their countries. It has happened in Tunisia and Egypt, now we see it in Libya. They have to change. -- Emmanuel, Tanzania 
What gives Germany the right to advocate anything? What Germany are you talking about? Germany is still an occupied country! Just because Germany likes foreign occupation (65 years is not enough?) it thinks that other nations love that too? -- Judutarrak, US 
It is becoming more and more imperative for Germany to refrain from giving advice in international matters, such as North Africa and others. Germany's forte is education, innovation and quality of production, as well as basic research from the deep oceans to outer space through all related sciences. Germany must understand that almost all problems popping up now are the consequence of colonialism, slavery and globalization, meaning exploitation through whatever means with the intention for future democracies under a military umbrella. -- HRF, Antigua and Barbuda 
Compiled by Stuart Tiffen
Editor: Michael Lawton Libyan rebels face new attacks by Gadhafi forces 
When people realize their democratic rights, nothing can stop them - not even bullets. Following the dramatic removal of both the Tunisian and Egyptian dictators, Gadhafi will be fried in the same pan, as the working and poor masses seek to remove repressive regimes out and forever. -- Mutua, Kenya 

Analysts remain skeptical about plans for a no-fly zone 
No, this strategy did not work well in Iraq and Libya is a much larger country. Also, Gadhafi might use this to his own advantage, by blaming the West, and the US in particular, for making war against the Libyan people thereby gaining a propaganda victory. -- G., Canada 

Germany

advocates tougher Libya sanctions amid escalating violence 
It's interesting that as long as a dictator does what the mighty dictator demands, it's okay, but as soon as they get older, less adaptable, no longer needed, out they go, and others jump on the bandwagon, like with Iraq, Egypt and now Libya. Out with the old, in with the new. It's all for the greed of oil. -- Marta, US 
First, I would like to congratulate world leaders for their great concern for Libya and other African countries. These leaders are working hard to make sure the situation in Libya gets back to normal and the suffering of Libyans stops. I am asking them to take actions and impose tougher sanctions to Moammar Gadhafi to rescue the lives of innocent people in Libya. I am afraid more delay will cost more lives. I also condemn the silence of African leaders, to them it's like there is nothing happening. They have been all quiet. Their silence proves to the world that most African rulers got to power through non-democratic and unfair elections. I call upon African leaders to wake up, open their eyes and face reality, otherwise, what is in Libya will soon happen in their countries. It has happened in Tunisia and Egypt, now we see it in Libya. They have to change. -- Emmanuel, Tanzania 
What gives Germany the right to advocate anything? What Germany are you talking about? Germany is still an occupied country! Just because Germany likes foreign occupation (65 years is not enough?) it thinks that other nations love that too? -- Judutarrak, US 
It is becoming more and more imperative for Germany to refrain from giving advice in international matters, such as North Africa and others. Germany's forte is education, innovation and quality of production, as well as basic research from the deep oceans to outer space through all related sciences. Germany must understand that almost all problems popping up now are the consequence of colonialism, slavery and globalization, meaning exploitation through whatever means with the intention for future democracies under a military umbrella. -- HRF, Antigua and Barbuda 
Compiled by Stuart Tiffen
Editor: Michael Lawton When people realize their democratic rights, nothing can stop them - not even bullets. Following the dramatic removal of both the Tunisian and Egyptian dictators, Gadhafi will be fried in the same pan, as the working and poor masses seek to remove repressive regimes out and forever. -- Mutua, Kenya 

Analysts remain skeptical about plans for a no-fly zone 
No, this strategy did not work well in Iraq and Libya is a much larger country. Also, Gadhafi might use this to his own advantage, by blaming the West, and the US in particular, for making war against the Libyan people thereby gaining a propaganda victory. -- G., Canada 

Germany

advocates tougher Libya sanctions amid escalating violence 
It's interesting that as long as a dictator does what the mighty dictator demands, it's okay, but as soon as they get older, less adaptable, no longer needed, out they go, and others jump on the bandwagon, like with Iraq, Egypt and now Libya. Out with the old, in with the new. It's all for the greed of oil. -- Marta, US 
First, I would like to congratulate world leaders for their great concern for Libya and other African countries. These leaders are working hard to make sure the situation in Libya gets back to normal and the suffering of Libyans stops. I am asking them to take actions and impose tougher sanctions to Moammar Gadhafi to rescue the lives of innocent people in Libya. I am afraid more delay will cost more lives. I also condemn the silence of African leaders, to them it's like there is nothing happening. They have been all quiet. Their silence proves to the world that most African rulers got to power through non-democratic and unfair elections. I call upon African leaders to wake up, open their eyes and face reality, otherwise, what is in Libya will soon happen in their countries. It has happened in Tunisia and Egypt, now we see it in Libya. They have to change. -- Emmanuel, Tanzania 
What gives Germany the right to advocate anything? What Germany are you talking about? Germany is still an occupied country! Just because Germany likes foreign occupation (65 years is not enough?) it thinks that other nations love that too? -- Judutarrak, US 
It is becoming more and more imperative for Germany to refrain from giving advice in international matters, such as North Africa and others. Germany's forte is education, innovation and quality of production, as well as basic research from the deep oceans to outer space through all related sciences. Germany must understand that almost all problems popping up now are the consequence of colonialism, slavery and globalization, meaning exploitation through whatever means with the intention for future democracies under a military umbrella. -- HRF, Antigua and Barbuda 
Compiled by Stuart Tiffen
Editor: Michael Lawton Analysts remain skeptical about plans for a no-fly zone 
No, this strategy did not work well in Iraq and Libya is a much larger country. Also, Gadhafi might use this to his own advantage, by blaming the West, and the US in particular, for making war against the Libyan people thereby gaining a propaganda victory. -- G., Canada 

Germany

advocates tougher Libya sanctions amid escalating violence 
It's interesting that as long as a dictator does what the mighty dictator demands, it's okay, but as soon as they get older, less adaptable, no longer needed, out they go, and others jump on the bandwagon, like with Iraq, Egypt and now Libya. Out with the old, in with the new. It's all for the greed of oil. -- Marta, US 
First, I would like to congratulate world leaders for their great concern for Libya and other African countries. These leaders are working hard to make sure the situation in Libya gets back to normal and the suffering of Libyans stops. I am asking them to take actions and impose tougher sanctions to Moammar Gadhafi to rescue the lives of innocent people in Libya. I am afraid more delay will cost more lives. I also condemn the silence of African leaders, to them it's like there is nothing happening. They have been all quiet. Their silence proves to the world that most African rulers got to power through non-democratic and unfair elections. I call upon African leaders to wake up, open their eyes and face reality, otherwise, what is in Libya will soon happen in their countries. It has happened in Tunisia and Egypt, now we see it in Libya. They have to change. -- Emmanuel, Tanzania 
What gives Germany the right to advocate anything? What Germany are you talking about? Germany is still an occupied country! Just because Germany likes foreign occupation (65 years is not enough?) it thinks that other nations love that too? -- Judutarrak, US 
It is becoming more and more imperative for Germany to refrain from giving advice in international matters, such as North Africa and others. Germany's forte is education, innovation and quality of production, as well as basic research from the deep oceans to outer space through all related sciences. Germany must understand that almost all problems popping up now are the consequence of colonialism, slavery and globalization, meaning exploitation through whatever means with the intention for future democracies under a military umbrella. -- HRF, Antigua and Barbuda 
Compiled by Stuart Tiffen
Editor: Michael Lawton No, this strategy did not work well in Iraq and Libya is a much larger country. Also, Gadhafi might use this to his own advantage, by blaming the West, and the US in particular, for making war against the Libyan people thereby gaining a propaganda victory. -- G., Canada 

Germany

advocates tougher Libya sanctions amid escalating violence 
It's interesting that as long as a dictator does what the mighty dictator demands, it's okay, but as soon as they get older, less adaptable, no longer needed, out they go, and others jump on the bandwagon, like with Iraq, Egypt and now Libya. Out with the old, in with the new. It's all for the greed of oil. -- Marta, US 
First, I would like to congratulate world leaders for their great concern for Libya and other African countries. These leaders are working hard to make sure the situation in Libya gets back to normal and the suffering of Libyans stops. I am asking them to take actions and impose tougher sanctions to Moammar Gadhafi to rescue the lives of innocent people in Libya. I am afraid more delay will cost more lives. I also condemn the silence of African leaders, to them it's like there is nothing happening. They have been all quiet. Their silence proves to the world that most African rulers got to power through non-democratic and unfair elections. I call upon African leaders to wake up, open their eyes and face reality, otherwise, what is in Libya will soon happen in their countries. It has happened in Tunisia and Egypt, now we see it in Libya. They have to change. -- Emmanuel, Tanzania 
What gives Germany the right to advocate anything? What Germany are you talking about? Germany is still an occupied country! Just because Germany likes foreign occupation (65 years is not enough?) it thinks that other nations love that too? -- Judutarrak, US 
It is becoming more and more imperative for Germany to refrain from giving advice in international matters, such as North Africa and others. Germany's forte is education, innovation and quality of production, as well as basic research from the deep oceans to outer space through all related sciences. Germany must understand that almost all problems popping up now are the consequence of colonialism, slavery and globalization, meaning exploitation through whatever means with the intention for future democracies under a military umbrella. -- HRF, Antigua and Barbuda 
Compiled by Stuart Tiffen
Editor: Michael Lawton Germany

advocates tougher Libya sanctions amid escalating violence 
It's interesting that as long as a dictator does what the mighty dictator demands, it's okay, but as soon as they get older, less adaptable, no longer needed, out they go, and others jump on the bandwagon, like with Iraq, Egypt and now Libya. Out with the old, in with the new. It's all for the greed of oil. -- Marta, US 
First, I would like to congratulate world leaders for their great concern for Libya and other African countries. These leaders are working hard to make sure the situation in Libya gets back to normal and the suffering of Libyans stops. I am asking them to take actions and impose tougher sanctions to Moammar Gadhafi to rescue the lives of innocent people in Libya. I am afraid more delay will cost more lives. I also condemn the silence of African leaders, to them it's like there is nothing happening. They have been all quiet. Their silence proves to the world that most African rulers got to power through non-democratic and unfair elections. I call upon African leaders to wake up, open their eyes and face reality, otherwise, what is in Libya will soon happen in their countries. It has happened in Tunisia and Egypt, now we see it in Libya. They have to change. -- Emmanuel, Tanzania 
What gives Germany the right to advocate anything? What Germany are you talking about? Germany is still an occupied country! Just because Germany likes foreign occupation (65 years is not enough?) it thinks that other nations love that too? -- Judutarrak, US 
It is becoming more and more imperative for Germany to refrain from giving advice in international matters, such as North Africa and others. Germany's forte is education, innovation and quality of production, as well as basic research from the deep oceans to outer space through all related sciences. Germany must understand that almost all problems popping up now are the consequence of colonialism, slavery and globalization, meaning exploitation through whatever means with the intention for future democracies under a military umbrella. -- HRF, Antigua and Barbuda 
Compiled by Stuart Tiffen
Editor: Michael Lawton It's interesting that as long as a dictator does what the mighty dictator demands, it's okay, but as soon as they get older, less adaptable, no longer needed, out they go, and others jump on the bandwagon, like with Iraq, Egypt and now Libya. Out with the old, in with the new. It's all for the greed of oil. -- Marta, US 
First, I would like to congratulate world leaders for their great concern for Libya and other African countries. These leaders are working hard to make sure the situation in Libya gets back to normal and the suffering of Libyans stops. I am asking them to take actions and impose tougher sanctions to Moammar Gadhafi to rescue the lives of innocent people in Libya. I am afraid more delay will cost more lives. I also condemn the silence of African leaders, to them it's like there is nothing happening. They have been all quiet. Their silence proves to the world that most African rulers got to power through non-democratic and unfair elections. I call upon African leaders to wake up, open their eyes and face reality, otherwise, what is in Libya will soon happen in their countries. It has happened in Tunisia and Egypt, now we see it in Libya. They have to change. -- Emmanuel, Tanzania 
What gives Germany the right to advocate anything? What Germany are you talking about? Germany is still an occupied country! Just because Germany likes foreign occupation (65 years is not enough?) it thinks that other nations love that too? -- Judutarrak, US 
It is becoming more and more imperative for Germany to refrain from giving advice in international matters, such as North Africa and others. Germany's forte is education, innovation and quality of production, as well as basic research from the deep oceans to outer space through all related sciences. Germany must understand that almost all problems popping up now are the consequence of colonialism, slavery and globalization, meaning exploitation through whatever means with the intention for future democracies under a military umbrella. -- HRF, Antigua and Barbuda 
Compiled by Stuart Tiffen
Editor: Michael Lawton First, I would like to congratulate world leaders for their great concern for Libya and other African countries. These leaders are working hard to make sure the situation in Libya gets back to normal and the suffering of Libyans stops. I am asking them to take actions and impose tougher sanctions to Moammar Gadhafi to rescue the lives of innocent people in Libya. I am afraid more delay will cost more lives. I also condemn the silence of African leaders, to them it's like there is nothing happening. They have been all quiet. Their silence proves to the world that most African rulers got to power through non-democratic and unfair elections. I call upon African leaders to wake up, open their eyes and face reality, otherwise, what is in Libya will soon happen in their countries. It has happened in Tunisia and Egypt, now we see it in Libya. They have to change. -- Emmanuel, Tanzania 
What gives Germany the right to advocate anything? What Germany are you talking about? Germany is still an occupied country! Just because Germany likes foreign occupation (65 years is not enough?) it thinks that other nations love that too? -- Judutarrak, US 
It is becoming more and more imperative for Germany to refrain from giving advice in international matters, such as North Africa and others. Germany's forte is education, innovation and quality of production, as well as basic research from the deep oceans to outer space through all related sciences. Germany must understand that almost all problems popping up now are the consequence of colonialism, slavery and globalization, meaning exploitation through whatever means with the intention for future democracies under a military umbrella. -- HRF, Antigua and Barbuda 
Compiled by Stuart Tiffen
Editor: Michael Lawton What gives Germany the right to advocate anything? What Germany are you talking about? Germany is still an occupied country! Just because Germany likes foreign occupation (65 years is not enough?) it thinks that other nations love that too? -- Judutarrak, US 
It is becoming more and more imperative for Germany to refrain from giving advice in international matters, such as North Africa and others. Germany's forte is education, innovation and quality of production, as well as basic research from the deep oceans to outer space through all related sciences. Germany must understand that almost all problems popping up now are the consequence of colonialism, slavery and globalization, meaning exploitation through whatever means with the intention for future democracies under a military umbrella. -- HRF, Antigua and Barbuda 
Compiled by Stuart Tiffen
Editor: Michael Lawton It is becoming more and more imperative for Germany to refrain from giving advice in international matters, such as North Africa and others. Germany's forte is education, innovation and quality of production, as well as basic research from the deep oceans to outer space through all related sciences. Germany must understand that almost all problems popping up now are the consequence of colonialism, slavery and globalization, meaning exploitation through whatever means with the intention for future democracies under a military umbrella. -- HRF, Antigua and Barbuda 
Compiled by Stuart Tiffen
Editor: Michael Lawton Compiled by Stuart Tiffen
Editor: Michael Lawton


Germany commends Arab revolutions, pledges aid to promote democracy Berlin has been vocal in welcoming revolution in the Arab world. German leaders have compared the Egyptian president's ouster to the fall of the Iron Curtain and have pledged new aid to promote democracy in Tunisia. The German government has welcomed the revolutions in Tunisia and Egypt, pledging Saturday to do its part in establishing democratic rule in the two countries. German Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle said Saturday during his visit to Tunisia that the country's democratic revolution was "irreversible." If Tunisia succeeds in democratizing, it would become "an example to other countries in the Arab world," added Westerwelle, who pledged additional aid money from Germany. Westerwelle told Trifi Germany would provide its know-how to help with Tunisia's elections Westerwelle arrived in Tunis earlier on Saturday, where the Foreign Ministry said he was to meet with interim Prime Minister Mohamed Ghannouchi and heads of various commissions tasked with implementing political reform and investigating the corruption of the past regime. "The aim of Minister Westerwelle's visit is to give a clear signal that Germany and Europe are ready to assist Tunisia in this ongoing period of transformation," Germany's Foreign Ministry said. Aid to Tunisia Tunisian League of Human Rights President Mokhtar Trifi told reporters on Saturday that Westerwelle had offered Germany's expertise and logistical assistance to ensure democratic elections in Tunisia. Westerwelle has called on the international community not to be distracted from Tunisia's needs by recent events in Egypt, where embattled President Hosni Mubarak stepped down on Friday after 18 days of sustained protests. Berlin has pledged 3 million euros ($4 million) to Tunisia as a "democracy promotion fund," as well as 500,000 euros to create student-exchange scholarships. Westerwelle urged other countries to join Germany in supporting Tunisia, which in January spurred pro-democratic public protests across the Arab world with a grassroots movement that led to the ouster of President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali. Merkel praises protests  Even Egyptians living in Berlin took to the streets to celebrate Mubarak's departure  Meanwhile, German Chancellor Angela Merkel said on Saturday that leaders in the Arab world should get accustomed to demands from their citizens for basic human rights. In her weekly video podcast, Merkel said recent protests in Arab capitals reminded her of those which "overthrew the dictatorships of eastern Europe" two decades ago. In the podcast, which was recorded before Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak stepped down Friday, Merkel said protestors in Tunis and Cairo had echoed the demands for freedom of those who brought down the Iron Curtain. "The people are rising up, not just in Europe but in other parts of the world, too," said the chancellor, who was raised in former communist East Germany. According to Merkel, the protests showed that "the people will no longer allow themselves to be stopped from speaking." Merkel added that it was up to Arabs to determine the reforms they wanted, but that respect for basic human rights such as freedom of expression was a must and "that begins with ensuring that the dignity of every single human is sacrosanct." Building democracy Additionally, Merkel said the shift in the Arab world created new challenges for Europe, which would be working more closely with the transitioning countries. "I believe that's our responsibility because there can only be peace and security for us when everyone on earth has the opportunity for a good life," she said.  Many protesters in Cairo say they would stay put until all their demands for reform are answered  On Friday, at the news of Mubarak's ouster, Merkel told reporters that she "rejoiced" together with the Egyptian people. "I call on those who now bear the responsibility and will bear the responsibility to make the developments in Egypt irreversible," she said in Berlin, where hundreds of Egyptians had gathered to celebrate the succeeded revolution in front of the city's Brandenburg Gate. Author: David Levitz (AFP, AP, dpa) Editor: Sean Sinico


German midfielder Khedira joins the Real revolution Germany midfielder Sami Khedira is leaving Stuttgart for Spanish soccer giants Real Madrid. After an impressive World Cup, the player is part of Jose Mourinho's plan to restore the club's somewhat faded glory. German international midfielder Sami Khedira is heading to Spanish soccer giants Real Madrid after the La Liga club agreed a deal with Stuttgart. Although the Bundesliga club refused to give details of the fee, it is believed to be in the region of 14 million euros ($18.3 million). "It's not easy to lose such a leading player as Sami Khedira," said Stuttgart sporting director Fredi Bobic. "However, on the other side, we understand Sami's wish to further his career by playing for Real." Khedira's Stuttgart contract runs until the end of 2011 and the club risked receiving no fee if he left at the end of next season. Real coach Jose Mourinho is hoping to restore the club's fortunes Since his international debut last September, Khedira has impressed and was given his chance to feature in the World Cup in South Africa when team captain Michael Ballack was kept out of the side through injury. Successful partnership Khedira formed a successful midfield partnership with Bastian Schweinsteiger and Germany finished in third place in the competition. The 23-year-old, who has a Tunisian father and German mother, is Mourinho's latest addition to the Real Madrid squad after the signing of Argentina winger Angel Di Maria and Spanish attacking midfielders Sergio Canales and Pedro Leon. Mourinho was hired to lead Real to new heights, and a first Champions League title since 2002, after football arch-rivals Barcelona won the Spanish league for a second season in succession earlier this year. Author: Richard Connor (dpa/Reuters) Editor: Nigel Tandy


Deutsche Welle: Shababtalk awarded ‘Best Arabic talk show’ for the third time Shababtalk, DW's popular and equally controversial TV format, has been honored by the Arab States Broadcasting Union (ASBU) with its third award for "Best Arabic talk show." DW also won gold for a reportage from Baghdad. The ASBU recognized the Shababtalk episode from Tunis "Six years after the revolution – what role do young people play today?." The joint production of DW and leading Tunisian broadcaster Nessma TV featured Majdouline Cherni, the country's sports and youth minister, who answered to the young audience's questions. Shababtalk production in Tunis DW presenter and reporter Jaafar Abdul Karim said it was "a very intense discussion. The program was a catalyst for the minister to later meet with other young people." Student protests in Tunisia ASBU representative Mounir Dhouib remarked that this was the first time in the history of the ASBU that a talk show won awards three years in a row. "This is a testament to the quality of this product," Dhouib said about the repeated success of the DW format. The insightful reportage about Jannat, a disabled Iraqi girl, won gold in the category of "Best reportage." The feature was produced in Baghdad on the sidelines of Shababtalk's "Arab World Tour," with the support of DW partner Al Rasheed TV. The broadcasting of the reportage drew a great deal of attention to the girl's story both locally and internationally. "Many people have since offered to help her. Sadly, Jannat passed away at the beginning of the year," Jaafar Abdul Karim explained. Since 2015, Shababtalk is regularly produced with the assistance of partners on location within its transmission area. The "Arab World Tour" has seen DW's Shababtalk team travel to Baghdad, Rabat, Dubai and Cairo. DW plans to broadcast six further productions from the target area this year.


Award-winning blogger says she’ll try to protect the 'fruits of the revolution' Lina Ben Mhenni (Tunisia) has received The BOBs blog award at the Deutsche Welle Global Media Forum in Bonn on Monday, June 20, 2011. A Special human rights blog award went to Esra'a Al Shafei (Egypt). In a ceremony at the Deutsche Welle Global Media Forum, Tunisian blogger Lina Ben Mhenni was presented with The BOBs international blog award, hosted by Deutsche Welle, on Monday evening, 20 June 2011 in Bonn, Germany. The 28-year-old professor at the University of Tunis has been writing about social and political events in her country in a blog called “A Tunisian Girl” (http://atunisiangirl.blogspot.com) for several years. She writes in French, English and Arabic. 
“When I saw how people were being killed it became clear there was no going back,” said Ben Mhenni. “I had to ensure that the voices of these people and their families be heard so that they hadn’t died in vain.” For her, the brutality of the regime in Tunisia was the main reason to provide online support to the revolution. But she says the revolution was created by the people “who took to the streets and risked their lives”.



Difficult path towards democracy

Since the political upheaval she has been blogging about her homeland’s difficult path towards democracy. She says the struggle for a democratic Tunisia by no means ended with Ben Ali’s downfall. Ben Mhenni says she’ll continue her work and “try to protect the fruits of the revolution”. 
An international jury awarded prizes in six categories. In a category termed “Special Topic Human Rights”, the jury named Esra'a Al Shafei’s website Migrant Rights in the Middle East (www.migrant-rights.org/). Ahmed Zidan, editor of an Internet platform called “Mideast Youth” – of which Migrant Rights in the Middle East is a part – accepted the award in Bonn on Al Shafei’s behalf. The site based in Bahrain draws attention to the living conditions of migrant workers in the Middle East who make up a large part of the workforce in some of the Gulf States. 

The BOBs Awards

Other winners at The BOBs awards ceremony in Bonn were: 
* Best Social Activism Campaign: Wael Ghonim (represented by Mohamed Ibrahim) for the Facebook page “We are all Khaled Said” (www.facebook.com/ElShaheeed)

* Best Video Channel: “Stands with Fist” (pseudonym; represented by Hannah Kaviani) for the YouTube channel “Stands with Fist” (http://www.youtube.com/user/standswithfist60)

* Best Use of Technology for Social Good: Pavel Senko for “Rospil” (http://rospil.info). The “Rospil” online community is also a project by Russian blogger Alexey Nawalny.

* Reporters Without Borders Award: Judith Torrea for the blog “Ciudad Juárez, en la sombra del narcotráfico” (http://juarezenlasombra.blogspot.com/)

Internet users from around the world submitted around 2,100 recommendations for The BOBs blog awards which are given in 11 languages and six categories. 
Audio recordings: http://soundcloud.com/dwgmf
Twitter: http://twitter.com/dw_gmf
YouTube http://www.youtube.com/user/DWGMF2011 The BOBs Awards

Other winners at The BOBs awards ceremony in Bonn were: 
* Best Social Activism Campaign: Wael Ghonim (represented by Mohamed Ibrahim) for the Facebook page “We are all Khaled Said” (www.facebook.com/ElShaheeed)

* Best Video Channel: “Stands with Fist” (pseudonym; represented by Hannah Kaviani) for the YouTube channel “Stands with Fist” (http://www.youtube.com/user/standswithfist60)

* Best Use of Technology for Social Good: Pavel Senko for “Rospil” (http://rospil.info). The “Rospil” online community is also a project by Russian blogger Alexey Nawalny.

* Reporters Without Borders Award: Judith Torrea for the blog “Ciudad Juárez, en la sombra del narcotráfico” (http://juarezenlasombra.blogspot.com/)

Internet users from around the world submitted around 2,100 recommendations for The BOBs blog awards which are given in 11 languages and six categories. 
Audio recordings: http://soundcloud.com/dwgmf
Twitter: http://twitter.com/dw_gmf
YouTube http://www.youtube.com/user/DWGMF2011


Poland/Tunisia: Revolutionary adviser 30 years ago, Lech Walesa was the leading figure in the Polish trade union Solidarity. Nowadays he's supporting Tunisians in their peaceful revolution. Walesa is convinced that, because of his own experiences, he can contribute to building a democratic society in Tunisia. So he's been meeting there with opposition figures, civil rights activists and former political prisoners. We accompany Walesa on his travels to the roots of the revolution and ask what kind of help the Tunisians are expecting from Europe.


Made in Germany One year ago, a young Tunisian set himself on fire and triggered the Jasmine Revolution at home and further revolutions across the Arab world. MADE IN GERMANY talks to a German businessman who has his products made in Tunisia and asks him how people are faring there.


Blogger's death set off protests against Egyptian repression The Facebook group "We are all Khaled Said" was one of the driving forces behind mobilizing protesters in Egypt. Deutsche Welle honored the group's organizers and members in its international Weblog award the BOBs. As he did so often, Khaled Said was sitting in an Egyptian Internet cafe. But on this day in June 2010, a pair of men entered the room and asked him for his ID. The men were secret police, and the 28-year-old blogger and computer specialist wouldn't meet their demands. Witnesses later said the men took him out of the cafe and slammed his head against walls before taking him, unconscious, to a police station. By the time he arrived, all that could be said with certainty was that Said was dead. To avoid being held responsible for their crimes, the police, according to Egyptian media reports, stuffed hash into his mouth in an effort to make Said look like a drug dealer. The police also accused Said of theft, dodging mandatory military service and sexual assault. Said's abused body was then dumped in front of the cafe from which he'd been dragged. Mother of a martyr It was a day Said's mother, Leila Marzouk, will never forget. In addition to the sorrow of losing her son, she and her family watched officials drag their names though the mud. Her accusers knew they had to tarnish Said's reputation - and his family's.  Said's sister and mother said he would have wanted to help organize protests had he lived "My husband died when Khaled was six years old," Marzouk told Deutsche Welle. "I had to raise Khaled the best I could, and I always did what was right and good. Then they come and say, 'You failed at raising your child.'" Said died on June 6, 2010, more than six months before former president Hosni Mubarak's regime fell. But Said is still regarded as a martyr and symbol of the Egyptian revolution. But it wasn't only his death that led to indignation. Shortly after his death, reports surfaced that gave his murder a political dimension: the blogger published hidden camera footage documenting police corruption. The alleged reason he was taken out of the cafe and killed quickly spread across the Internet. Photos of a young man next to his disfigured corpse became a symbol of the Mubarak regime's repression. In Alexandria, where Said was born, demonstrations began just days after his death. Online organization Though she said she remains proud of her son, Marzouk added that it was a strange situation.  Photos of Khaled, alive and dead, were common in Egyptian protests  "A lot of young people took to the streets chanting 'down with Mubarak, down with [interior minister] Habib Al-Adli,'" she said. "I asked the people, 'What does this have to do with my son's death?' and they told me, 'We're making sure for you that Khaled gets his rights.'" Wael Ghonim, the Internet giant Google's head of marketing for the Middle East, was one of Said's friends and a leading Internet activist. Using a pseudonym, he and some friends started a Facebook group and, in honor of Said, gave it a name that summed up many young Egyptian's feelings: "We are all Khaled Said." Hundreds of thousands of people joined the group, and over a period of months it grew to become one of the Egyptian opposition's most important platforms to mobilize people to take action aimed at removing the government. The group documented human rights abuses committed by state authorities, helping activists exchange information and plan demonstrations after the Tunisian uprising was successful in forcing former president Ben Ali to flee the country in January 2011. Democracy's price Today, the Facebook group's original Arabic version has nearly 1.5 million members and remains a popular spot to debate the issues coming up as Egypt works to make the difficult transition toward creating a true civil society. An English Facebook group with more than 100,000 members also supports uprisings in other Arab countries, including Syria and Libya.  The Facebook group was an important resource for informing and organizing protesters  "We are all Khaled Said" won the 2011 Deutsche Welle International Blog (The BOBS) award in the Best Social Activism Campaign category. The competition's jury members said the group and its members had played an important role in achieving political change in Egypt. Khaled Said's sister Zahraa said she is proud that the group named in honor of her brother won the award. "I think Khaled would have liked to have been among the founders of such a Facebook group," she said. "And he certainly would have found someone else to dedicate it to. He was someone who liked things like that. That's just the way he was." Author: Salah Sharara / sms Editor: Stuart Tiffen


Birthplace of Arab Spring still waiting to see real change Residents in the small Tunisian town that sparked Arab Spring say they have yet to see real transformation in their daily lives, even after the Tunisian dictator was toppled. As Tunisia heads towards its first free elections this October, discontent and violent unrest continue to threaten the country, even in the small town that sparked the Arab Spring revolutions that have reached across Mideast and North African countries. The small central Tunisian town of Sidi Bouzid is home to some 40,000 residents, a small produce market and a few government buildings, and it was vegetable vendor Mohammed Bouazizi's self-immolation death here on January 4 that tipped Tunisia into a public revolt, leading the rest of the Arab world. Bouazizi's act triggered the uprising that toppled Tunisia's long-time dictator Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali. But locals say they are still awaiting real political change. Just earlier this month, a teenage boy was killed in Sidi Bouzid amid anti-government riots. Waiting for justice The family of another hero, Adel Hammami, says they are still hoping for justice for Hammami, who died in February after being summoned to a police station. The 36-year-old had threatened to expose fraud within the old ruling RCD party. "The family has asked the Interior Ministry to launch a wider investigation, but so far nothing's happened," Hammami's sister Monjia told Deutsche Welle. Other Sidi Bouzid residents are also frustrated, agreeing that progress, especially economic progress, has been slow to come to their town. Former history teacher Ridha Bargougui says he lost his job in 1998 and is still unemployed. "Nothing has changed since Tunisia's revolution. Everything is blocked," Bargougui said.  Mohammed Bouazizi became a figurehead of the Arab Spring revolutions  Local activist Mohamed Sghaier Noury agrees that many of the problems that fueled Tunisia's revolution remain - not only in Sidi Bouzid, but across the country. "There has been no local development," he said. "No involvement of the people in any decision process - whether it's political or economic or social." Hoping for 'clear signs'  Unemployment remains high in Sidi Bouzid. Jobless university graduates here reportedly pasted their diplomas on municipal buildings in protest.  Noury has founded a local non-governmental organization called Madrassa, which has developed a blueprint for grassroots change in this rural region, starting with agricultural development. He says Madrassa has presented its plan to the government in Tunis, with positive initial response.  Noury said the people need "clear signs … that local development is starting." "This gives hope to the people that the future will be better than it has been." Author: Elizabeth Bryant, Sidi Bouzid / dl Editor: Nicole Goebel


Familiar faces dominate new interim government in Tunisia Tunisia's acting prime minister has unveiled an interim power-sharing government, with several ministers in ousted President Ben Ali's cabinet retaining their posts. The opposition will also take control of key dossiers. Tunisia's acting prime minister on Monday appointed opposition figures and former ministers in a new national unity government, attempting to establish stability after violent protests brought down the president last Friday. Mohamed Ghannouchi also announced that the government was committed to releasing all political prisoners, and that anyone suspected of corruption would face investigation. Ghannouchi declared that from now, the state would be independent of all political parties and that the government would review the ban on several political parties and organizations imposed by the administration of ousted President Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali. "We are committed to intensifying our efforts to re-establish calm and peace in the hearts of all Tunisians. Our priority is security, as well as political and economic reform," Ghannouchi told a news conference. The ministers of defense, interior, finance and foreign affairs will keep their jobs in the new unity government. Three opposition leaders - Ahmed Nejib Chebbi, Ahmed Brahim and Mustapha Ben Jaafar - will be brought into the government. Opposition leader Nejib Chebbi will be a new minister Chebbi, founder of the Progressive Democratic Party, the biggest of the legalized opposition parties, was named minister for regional development. Brahim, who heads the Ettajdid Movement, a leftist party that grew out of the Communist Party, was appointed minister for higher education and scientific research. And Ben Jaafar, leader of Union of Freedom and Labor, became health minister. Public skepticism Despite the announcement, the uncertainty continued on the streets of the capital, Tunis. About 1,000 demonstrators took to the streets earlier on Monday demanding that the rest of Ben Ali’s ruling party also step down. They said they would not accept members of the Ben Ali government in the new coalition. Security forces intervened, using water cannon and tear gas to disperse the protesters. Overnight, shooting was heard in parts of Tunis, after clashes between special forces and members of the former president's security squad. Tanks and soldiers were stationed on the streets of Tunis, and the US embassy said it would evacuate family members to Rabat in Morocco on Tuesday. Tunisia’s government said Monday that more than 78 protesters and other civilians had died in the unrest in the last month. Nearly 100 people have been injured. The Interior Minister Ahmed Friaa added that the troubles had cost the Tunisian economy 2 billion dollars (1.5 billion euros). He reported damage by vandalism to police stations, town halls, banks, factories, as well as shops. International support UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon called for the establishment of the rule of law in Tunisia, and the Arab League said Arab states should consider what lessons could be learned from the crisis. A statement from the European Union's High Representative for Foreign Affairs Catherine Ashton called for a democratic transition in Tunisia.  People were venturing out to the shops again  "The European Union stands ready to provide immediate assistance to prepare and organize the elections process if requested," Ashton's spokeswoman, Maja Kicijancic said on Monday. Exiled Tunisian party leader Moncef Marzouki meanwhile referred to the interim government as a "masquerade." The medical professor, who has lived in France since his Congress for the Republic party was banned, announced his intention to return to Tunisia and run for president. New elections The were long queues from bread and groceries in Tunis on Monday, as people stocked up on food after several days when shops were shut and most people stayed in their homes. Constitutional authorities have said new elections must be held within 60 days, after Ben Ali fled to Saudi Arabia on Friday. Author: Joanna Impey, David Levitz (AFP, dpa, Reuters) Editor: Rob Turner


Tunisia in turmoil after Chokri Belaid killing Tunisians are in shock, following the assassination of opposition politician, Chokri Belaid, on Wednesday (06.02.2013). Thousands of people took to the streets to call for the government to step down. On Wednesday (06.02.2013) evening, Tunisian Prime Minister Hamadi Jebali announced that he would be dissolving the government following the assassination of opposition politician, Chokri Belaid. The main task of a new government of technocrats would be to prepare the country for elections "as soon as possible," he said. The first assassination in decades Earlier on Wednesday, around a thousand men, women, the elderly and schoolchildren had gathered in front of the hospital where the body of Belaid was transported after he was shot dead in front of his home. The killer, who is yet to be identified, shot the politician in the head and chest earlier in the morning. The assassination has left Tunisians shocked and angry, and desperate to make their anger known. "We are all Tunisians. Right or left, that doesn't matter. But Tunisia isn't like that. Something like that can't happen in our country," a protester shouted in a tearful voice. This is the first time that a politician has been assassinated in Tunisia in the last 50 years. Tunisians protesting following the killing of opposition politician, Chokri Belaid On Tuesday (05.02.2013), Belaid had warned against political killing during a talk show on Tunisian TV. He had received threats several times. Less than 24 hours later, several opposition politicians, civil society representatives and schoolchildren were gathered in front of the hospital where the body of Belaid now lay. An attack on the revolution Iyed Dahmami, a member of parliament of the center left Republican Party, indirectly said that the ruling coalition, under the leadership of Islamist party, Ennahda, is responsible for the assassination. He spoke of an attack on the revolution. "Those who have ignored political violence for months are responsible. Every time that we warned, they said, those are our children, we have to get into a dialogue with them. Today, we see that this dialogue with Islamists and extremists is leading to political killings," Dahmami said. From the hospital, a funeral procession began to move, and in the afternoon several thousand people gathered in front of the interior ministry in Tunis. "Bread and water, but Ennahda no," the thousands of protesters called using slogans, based on the revolution two years ago. They were calling for the government to step down, and a general strike. The protesters believe the Islamists are responsible for the death of Chokri Belaid. Mohamed is one of those who protested. He voted for Ennahda in the October 2011 elections. "We voted for them because we thought that they are God-fearing. But they quickly forgot religion, [and] instead they are only interested in their posts. May God protect our country," he said. 'A man of the people' Chokri Belaid was one of the fiercest critics of the ruling coalition led by Ennahda. The staunch communist, who grew up in a poor neighborhood of Tunis, warned of the dangers of a new dictatorship. Together with other opposition parties, the 48 year old founded the Popular Front, a union of left-wing parties – it was the third strongest political force in Tunisia, according to polls. The father of outspoken government critic Chokri Belaid mourns University professor Mohammen Souissi knew Belaid since student days. He is calmly trying to understand what happened. "Ennahda and the salafists specifically chose him. They did it because of his thinking," he said. Belaid was a man of the people, a courageous politician, who made them afraid. "Belaid is someone, who made people think and that's what Tunisians need. Now, the country is waking up," he added. Souissi is hoping that the killing of Belaid will bring Tunisians together, despite their differences, and that the democratic forces will fight together for a democratic state.


Clashes mar funeral of Tunisia's slain opposition leader Tunisian police have clashed with protesters gathered for the funeral of Chokri Belaid. The opposition leader's assassination on Wednesday has plunged the city into a renewed state of turmoil. Violence erupted when gangs of young men threw stones and set cars ablaze as the opposition leader's funeral procession passed through his childhood neighborhood of Jebel Jeloud towards the Jallaz cemetery. Police responded with teargas. At least 50,000 people chanting anti-government slogans converged on the cemetery on Friday to honor Belaid. Permalink http://p.dw.com/p/17bAb He was laid to rest at around 1500 GMT as thousands cried "Allahu akbar!" (God is greatest), before singing the national anthem and reciting a verse of the Koran. In the city center, meanwhile, police fired teargas at protesters who chanted anti-government slogans on Habib Bourguiba Avenue, the epicenter of the 2011 revolution that toppled autocratic president Zine El Abidine Ben Ali and sparked a wave of Arab uprisings in the region. Armoured vehicles and troops had taken up positions along the landmark boulevard. Separately protests were also held in the southern towns of Gafsa and Sidi Bouzid, the birthplace of the 2011 revolt, where crowds chanted "the people want the fall of the regime." General strike takes effect Tunisia was largely shut down on Friday after the powerful General Union of Tunisian Workers called a general strike to protest Belaid's killing. Banks, factories and some shops were closed in Tunis and a number of other cites. Tunis Air also said it had suspended all its flights due to the strike action. It is believed to be the biggest strike since January 14, 2011 - the day former president Ben Ali fled to Saudi Arabia, where he remains in exile. A general strike that the union had threatened to call back in December was averted through negotiations. The murder of the secular leader two days ago has thrown Tunisia into renewed turmoil. Tunis has witnessed several days of rioting and the Ennahda party offices in the capital have come under frequent attack. Belaid, the coordinator of the leftist Popular Front coalition, was shot by an unknown attacker outside his house. He had been a vocal critic of the government in recent months and many regard the ruling Ennahda party as being complicit in his death. No one has claimed responsibility for the killing of Belaid and the party has fiercely denied allegations against it. After Belaid's assassination, Islamist Prime Minister Hamdi Jebali said he would dissolve government and form a Cabinet of nonpartisan technocrats to rule until elections could be held. The opposition welcomed Jebali's plan, but his own party is against it, demanding that members be consulted before such a move and arguing that the government still needs politicians. ccp/pfd (AFP, Reuters, AP)


Violence breaks out in Libya following protesters' funerals Thousands of people in Libya staged further rallies on Friday, following a "Day of Anger" against President Moammar Gadhafi's government on Thursday in which several people were reported killed. Thousands of people attended the funerals of anti-goverment protesters, who were killed in the eastern city of Benghazi during Thursday's "Day of Anger" rallies. At least 20 people are believed to have died in the clashes with Libyan security forces. Opposition activists said further violent protests broke out after the funerals. Political anaylsts point out that Libya's relative oil wealth should allow Gadhafi's government to make social and economic concessions, which could stifle an Egypt-style uprising. However the unrest in Benghazi, the traditional home of the opposition, could still spark a nationwide revolt. Libya's security forces moved quickly to quell the protests The citizens of Benghazi have a history of antagonism against Gadhafi, who has been in power for more than 40 years, but the city is an anomaly in Libya. Home of the opposition could provide the spark Seen as the home of the country's opposition, many Benghazis refused to support Gadhafi when he came to power in a military coup in 1969. As such, unlike the rest of the country, Benghazi has been cut out of much of the country's oil wealth. "There is a long history of opposition to Gadhafi's idiosyncratic and fiercely repressive regime, but protesting has not been common," Dr. Alia Brahimi, a Libya expert at the London School of Economics and Political Science, told Deutsche Welle. Brahimi said this was due to the regime's zero-tolerance policy to any form of independent political gathering or organization. "The state's response has been iron-fisted every time," Brahimi said. "Yet anger at dire socio-economic conditions and the regime's brutality has periodically boiled over onto the streets, particularly in Benghazi and the eastern region of Cyrenaica. The Islamists which emerged to violently challenge Gadhafi in the 1990s were mainly drawn from the Cyrenaican slums." Dana Moss, a Libya expert and Adjunct Fellow at the Washington Institute, said much of the agitation came for those areas traditionally hostile to the Gadhafi regime. "These areas have seen continuous hostility and sporadic disturbances aimed at the Gadhafi regime such as the rally against the Muhammad cartoons which turned into an anti-regime demonstration in 2006," Moss told Deutsche Welle. With a feeling of empowerment sweeping through Arab states, there is a chance that the Benghazi protest may be the spark that ignites simmering resentment elsewhere in the country, especially among Islamic groups which have been clamped down on since Gadhafi renounced terrorism and reached out to the West in the wake of the September 11, 2001 attacks on the US. Libyan opposition already employing Internet tactics  Protestors have utilized Internet tools to rally support  There are early signs that the opposition is utilizing social networking sites in the same way that the Tunisian and Egytian movements did in the early stages of their own uprisings. It has also been reported that a Facebook page has been set up to relay information to opposition supporters over the past few days. The page carried information on the strength of the security forces in Tripoli, advising protestors that no military units were yet in the capital, suggesting the regime was either taken by surprise or expecting little resistance. Reports have since filtered through that the regime is trying to clampdown on the Internet with Facebook and Twitter accounts being suspended. If the unrest spreads and grows into a nationwide anti-government movement - like those seen in Tunisia, Egypt, Yemen and Algeria - analysts believe that oil-rich Libya is better equipped to deal with any political upheaval. Read more about Libya's power structures


Tunisia kills Islamist 'terror' suspect Tunisian police have shot dead a suspected Islamist militant and arrested several more, officials have said. Tunisia has been grappling with growing security threats as it deals with lingering political instability. The terror suspect was shot dead by Tunisian special forces in a pre-dawn raid, the nation's interior ministry confirmed Sunday. The interior ministry statement said the raid targeted a house in the southern Tunis suburb of Ouardia where a group of "key terror" suspects were hiding. "One of the members of the group was eliminated in an exchange of fire, and four were arrested," the ministry said. It did not elaborate on the reason the suspects were targeted. The push against suspected extremists comes almost two weeks after the assassination of opposition MP Brahmi, which authorities have blamed on an al-Qaeda-linked cell. He was the second anti-government politician to have been killed in Tunis since the murder of leftist politician Chokri Belaid in February. It also comes amid rival protests across the country for and against the embattled Islamist-led coalition government. The opposition has demanded the resignation of the cabinet and the dissolution of the National Constituent Assembly. Mass protests Tens of thousands came out in support of the ruling Ennahda party in Tunis late on Saturday, in one of the biggest elections since the revolution. It prompted the opposition to call for a rival rally on Sunday. They also plan to hold a rally on Wednesday to mark the six month anniversary of Chokri Belaid's killing. Tunisia, largely considered the cradle of the Arab Spring, had been considered a model for political transition. Critics accuse the government of tolerating violence blamed on radical Islamists since the ouster of President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali in 2011. ccp/hc (AFP, dpa, Reuters)


'Potentially huge repercussions for Tunisia' Tunisian opposition politician Mohamed Brahmi was shot dead in the second such political killing this year, prompting violent protests against the Islamist-led government. What is behind the assassination? Mohamed Brahmi was about to leave his home on Thursday (27.07.2013) when he was shot before the eyes of his wife. Doctors found 14 bullets in his body. Brahmi, 58, is not the first prominent opposition politician to be assassinated in Tunisia this year, In February, unknown killers murdered then-party leader Chokri Belaid. Tunisian authorities say the same murder weapon was used in both cases. What does this assassination mean for Tunisia? Deutsche Welle spoke to Joachim Paul, head of the Heinrich Böll Foundation in Tunis. Deutsche Welle: What role did Mohamed Brahmi play in Tunisia? Mohamed Brahmi was a critic of the ruling coalition Joachim Paul: Mohamed Brahmi was an important representative of the Tunisian political landscape. He was a member of the Constituent Assembly. Sidi Bouzid was his electoral district, where the Tunisian revolution began. Brahmi headed the Popular Front party, a small Arab nationalist political party with two representatives in the Assembly. Who could be behind Brahmi's murder? What immediately stands out is that the murder followed a similar, if not the same, pattern as the killing of party leader Chokri Belaid at the start of the year. That is true for the assassination method as well as the profile of the victim. Of course, there is quite some speculation. Some believe parts of the old regime are behind the attacks, others suspect radical Islamist underground organizations. The victim's family accuses Ennahda, the ruling Islamist party, of being behind the attack. What do you think about these accusations? Relatives and supporters mourned at the hospital That is very difficult to judge. The leftwing opposition also held Ennahda responsible for the murder of Chokri Belaid. But Ennahda and leader Rached Ghannouchi immediately declared that they believe the Brahmi assassination was an attack on the transformation process in Tunisia. So it is very important for Ennahda, for the Tunisian government and for the Tunisian people that these murders be solved, indeed in a credible and transparent manner, and as quickly as possible. What sort of consequences could there be from the murder? It could have significant political repercussions. The assassination of Chokri Belaid in February triggered a political earthquake. It resulted in the resignation of the first Ennahda government. There have already been demands from within the left and civilian society for the government to resign. These people want a government of national unity. That government should reshape the transformation process and bring it to a successful conclusion. Plans at the moment are to definitely adopt the new constitution this summer in the Constituent Assembly. Elections will then be scheduled for the end of this year, or the beginning of next year. It remains to be seen whether all of this can be realized. In Egypt, the military toppled Islamist President Mohammed Morsi. How great is the danger that Tunisia wil experience a development similar to Egypt? Of course, developments in Tunisia and Egypt are related. But the countries are structurally different. Egypt was a military dictatorship for decades and now the military has again assumed power. In Tunisia, the military does not have a direct political role. Even the dictatorship of Ben Ali, who was ousted in January 2011 by a popular revolt, is based more on the police and secret services than a military regime. For that reason I believe they can't be compared directly. Tunisians are dissatisfied, Joachim Paul says But a rebel movement developed in Tunisia, too. It has the same name as in Egypt, Tamarud, which is the Arab word for rebellion. The movement called for the dissolution of the Constituent Assembly. I suspect there will be a run on this movement following the assassination. Is an overthrow of the Islamists possible in Tunisia? Ennahda rules in a coalition with two smaller parties, including the party of President Moncef Marzouki. It is an elected government. I could imagine political dynamics that challenge a continuation of this government. How has the political climate developed in Tunisia since Ben Ali's overthrow? There is great dissatisfaction among the population. In the two and a half years since the revolution, little has happened that would point to changed living conditions and an improved economic situation. The majority of the people are disappointed that the constituent process takes so long. The process was originally slated to take one year and was to conclude in October 2012, a year after the 2011 elections. But the constitution is still being debated. How strong is the opposition? The opposition is definitely very strong. If all the opposition forces were to unite, they could really pose a political threat to Ennahda in elections. So I would say the outcome of the political dispute is wide open.


WorldLink Join us as we mark the first anniversary of the Egyptian revolution by hearing from the people who made it happen. Also on the show: the Syrian protester whose injuries give him away and the Tunisian blogger enjoying newfound freedom on the web.


Tunisia's young 'General' sees future in sharia Feted by the western media for penning the unofficial anthem of the Arab Spring, rap star El General believes the changes must go further. He is one of a number of young Tunisian "revolutionaries" calling for sharia law. Hamada Ben Amor wears a dress jacket and jeans. The rather shy 23-year old lives with his parents in a whitewashed house in the suburbs of Sfax, on Tunisia's eastern coast. They are middle class; his mother works in a bookshop, his father in a hospital clinic. He is engaged to his childhood sweetheart and saving up to get married. He is a practicing Muslim. As El General, Hamada Ben Amor made his name as a unifying figure, using music to bring together those who called for change. His most famous rap, "Rais Le Bled," was fiercely critical of then President Ben Ali. It inspired Tunisia's youth to take to the streets and resulted in Time Magazine dubbing him as one of the most influential voices in 2011.  Inspired by US rappers, like the late Tupac, Ben Amor began rapping as a teenager. He saw rap as direct and honest, the "music of the people."  "When I first started to sing I wanted to go back to the roots of rap that emerged in the 1970s in the United States," he said. "This rap openly criticized government, corruption and racism. That was the kind of rap that I wanted to do. I did not want to do light rap. I wanted it have weight, to have a message and to convey my anger against the government."  Religious renaissance  Two years after the revolution, he's still angry. Many young people see Islam as the way forward for Tunisia "I am against the current government because it betrayed its promises, it betrayed people's expectations," he says. "Ennahda, the party in power, is more political than religious and this is what is disappointing."  Under President Ben Ali, Islam - both as a religion and as part of political life - was repressed. Now the country is experiencing a religious renaissance that is deeply divisive.  Ennahda, which won Tunisia's first post-revolution elections, is an Islamist party, but it is a moderate one.  Unity was then  Like Ben Amor, many of the young Tunisians who took to the streets in the revolution, embrace both religious tradition and western culture. Now, frustrated by high youth unemployment - one in five are jobless - and the slow pace of reform, a growing number of the young are turning to politicized forms of Islam, despite Tunisia's strong tradition of secularism.  Ben Amor is convinced that Islam holds the answer to his country's problems. Islamic law has all the answers, Ben Amor says "Sharia is a whole world," he says. "In sharia there is law and science. There are scientists from all over the world who have found answers in the Koran. It is a comfort and a luxury. Under sharia all Tunisians will be brothers and sisters. Sharia is the one solution."  He puts paid to those thoughts with his latest rap, "I Wish." The lyrics call for Tunisia to become an Islamic state, part of an Arabic world without borders. Unlike the rap that propelled Ben Hamor to fame, the vision he expresses in "I Wish" threatens to divide Tunisia and those who took part in the revolution.


Tunisia: Nationwide alumni meeting DW Akademie's first Tunisian alumni meeting has given more than 50 former workshop participants a chance to share experiences and to network with other journalists from all over the country. Journalists, media executives and lecturers from journalism institutes traveled from various parts of Tunisia to take part in the one-day meeting held in Tunis in February. The event allowed journalists who had previously taken part in DW Akademie trainings to meet and discuss their experiences working in the media. It also gave them the chance to exchange views on the revolution, the ensuing political changes and the challenges of the on-going upheaval. It was also an opportunity for DW Akademie to receive feedback on its Tunisian training initiatives. "We wanted to know the impact these various projects were having and to see what still needs to be done," says coordinator for North Africa, Bernd Rößle. DW Akademie trainer Sarah Mersch adds, "The alumni were very enthusiastic and said their work routineshad become more professional." Participants also made concrete suggestions for future training projects: many said editors-in-chief and station managers should take part in trainings to bring about long-term structural changes. Germany's ambassador to Tunisia, Jens Plötner, held a reception for the alumni and discussed Germany's role in supporting Tunisia's democratic changes. He also underlined how important the media were in this process. Given the current domestic leadership crisis and mass protests, he said access to free and fair information was crucial and media professionals had a significant role to play. Ambassador Plötner praised DW Akademie's projects and said he hoped they would continue. On-going support DW Akademie became active in Tunisia shortly after the revolution resulted in the ousting of President Ben Ali in January 2011. In order to discuss the media's future in a democratic society, DW Akademie and the Friedrich Ebert Foundation organized a conference for leading journalists, state and private media representatives, and stakeholders from civil society. Since then, DW Akademie has regularly held training workshops for journalists and media managers as well as coordinated cooperative projects with Tunisian training institutes. To date more than 300 journalists, editors-in-chief and station managers have taken part in advanced training initiatives. Conducting interviews on the street during a DW Akademie workshop in 2011 Although the situation for Tunisian journalists is far from stable - Reporters Without Borders lists repeated attacks against journalists - freedom of the press and an increasingly diverse media landscape have been among the revolution's greatest successes. The media market has exploded since the end of censorship: there are now scores of private broadcasters, state broadcasters are re-thinking their structures, there's a booming newspaper sector and a growing number of online news and information sites. DW Akademie will continue and further develop its long-term projects in Tunisia. Project manager Rüdiger Maack has been on location since January 2013 to coordinate projects and to plan and conduct additional ones in close cooperation with Tunisian partners.


Tunisia police tear-gas thousands protesting killing Tunisian police have tear-gassed thousands of protesters who gathered to denounce the murder of an opposition leader. The leading leftist politician Chokri Belaid was assassinated on Wednesday morning.


Thousands gather in Tunisia for Belaid's funeral Thousands of people have gathered in Tunis for the funeral of slain opposition leader Chokri Belaid. The Tunisian city has been in a state of unrest since his assassination two days ago. Around 3,000 people waited Friday outside the capital's Cultural Center, where Belaid's body lay before the funeral. A procession is due to make its way to the nearby cemetery of el-Jellaz where the former opposition leader, shot dead Wednesday, will be buried. "Belaid, rest in peace, we will continue the struggle," the crowd chanted, holding portraits of the slain leader. Some shouted slogans against Rachid Ghannouchi, leader of the ruling Islamist Ennahda party, which has been accused of being behind the killing. "Ghannouchi, assassin, criminal," they chanted. "Tunisia is free, terrorism out." The military deployed vehicles and troops along Habib Bourguiba Avenue, the epicenter of the 2011 revolution that toppled autocrat president Zine El Abidine Ben Ali and sparked a wave of uprisings across the Arab world. General strike The Tunisian General Labor Union (UGTT) and four opposition groups called for a general strike to coincide with Belaid's funeral. It is not yet clear how many people participated in the work stoppage – UGTT has some 500,000 members – but its effects are already being felt throughout the city. Streets were deserted, with many shops and factories closing in response to the strike. Tunis' international airport was shut down and airport authorities said all flights to and from the capital were canceled. Anger over Belaid's death Belaid, the coordinator of the leftist Popular Front coalition, was shot by an unknown attacker outside his house. He had been a vocal critic of the government in recent months, and his family blamed Ennahda for the shooting, but the party has denied any involvement. Crowds have attacked several Ennahda party offices in the capital and other cities in ongoing protests over the past two days. One policeman was killed in riots in Tunis Wednesday. After Belaid's assassination, Islamist Prime Minister Hamdi Jebali said he would dissolve government and form a cabinet of non-partisan technocrats to rule until elections could be held. The opposition welcomed Jebali's plan, but his own party is against it, demanding they be consulted before such a move and arguing the government still needs politicians. dr/kms (AFP, Reuters, dpa)


Court issues fines for broadcast of 'Persepolis' After broadcasting the film 'Persepolis' in October, an animated film that contains a depiction of God forbidden in Islam, a Tunisian TV station boss has been slapped with a fine. The head of a television station that screened the award-winning Franco-Iranian film "Persepolis" in October was fined by a Tunisian court on Thursday for "broadcasting a film that disturbs public order and threatens proper morals." The animated film, which is a take on the Iranian revolution through the eyes of a young girl, includes a depiction of God, which is considered sacrilegious in Islam. Nabil Karoui, who runs the private Nessma TV station that showed the movie, was given a fine of 2,400 dinars (1,200 euros, $1,575). Two other workers at Nessma were also fined. When the film aired in October, it sparked a furious response from some Muslims in Tunisia. The TV station as well as Karoui's home were attacked. Defenders of Karoui say the guilty verdict infringes his right to freedom of the press in a country that is still finding its footing ahead of its first democratic elections following the fall of former dictator Ben Ali, which was brought on by popular protests. Karoui could have faced a much heavier sentence of up to three years in prison. His lawyers have said they will appear the decision of the court. mz/msh (AP, AFP, Reuters)


Tunisia's dreams of change fade by the day despite sentencing It was over almost as soon as it had begun. A court in Tunis has sentenced former Tunisian President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali to 35 years in prison. However the discontent of the local Tunisians remains. "It's outrageous that he spends the rest of his days peacefully in Saudi Arabia. We must bring him back so he is judged by the people who suffered him for more than 20 years," says Bassid, who has gathered along with like-minded protesters at the Human Rights park in Tunis to voice their demands. Despite the arrest warrant issued by the Tunisian military court and the extradition request to Saudi Arabia, few here think Ben Ali and his wife will ever again set foot in the country they left behind on January 14. The former presidential couple face charges of theft, fraud, and even weapons and drugs possession. At first sight, the main reason for their absence may look obvious, but there might be many more underlying issues. "The interim government is selling an image of freedom in Tunisia which hardly matches with reality. The current executive is full of Ben Ali's former executive members and we are witnessing constant harassment and arrests of peaceful protesters like us on a daily basis," Nasradin, one of the participants of this sit-in at the centric park, told Deutsche Welle. The young protester pointed to the case of Muhammad Amin Slam, who was arrested after he released footage online of two policemen brutally beating two kids. Slam will be tried next month on charges of terrorism. "The government is trying to boost the idea that we are terrorists but there is no terrorism at all in Tunisia. We are just humble people whose hopes for the future are starting to fade, they are stealing our revolution," Karim, another protester, told Deustche Welle, as he collected the litter from the ground in a plastic bag. "They also claim that we are being paid by political parties like the Islamists or the communists to gather here but that is just another blatant lie. We came here on our own four days ago, the same way as all those who are now demonstrating in their thousands in Spain," added Maryam, a university student in charge of preparing sandwiches for the rest of the people. Impact on image  Tunisians are hoping for better times But the image of Tunisia under the threat of terrorism has already had an impact on the number of people visiting the country in the last five months. The first statistics recently released by the OTE (Office for Tunisians Abroad) point to a reduction of 20 percent of Tunisians returning home for their summer break. There is still no official data on the effect the alleged instability has had on tourism as a whole - one of Tunisia's biggest sources of income - but some estimates suggest that the influx of foreigners could have dropped by half, and with no visible signs of recovery. Nonetheless the benefits generated by tourism are of the lesser importance for Saida, a veteran protester in her fifties. "A sniper killed my son during the days of the revolution but nobody has been tried for this crime yet," she told Deutsche Welle producing a photograph of Halib, her 23 year old son. Saida is one of the many mothers who lost their sons during the uprising against Ben Ali, during which around 300 people are believed to have been killed. The lack of any legal action against the members of the security forces responsible for the murders so far is a major cause of unrest among the Tunisian population. "They say the regime has changed but the police is still acting with total impunity. We fear our phone conversations are still monitored -we often hear strange echoes - and we are threatened with jail if we try to gather in Bourghiba Boulevar - the city's main avenue. On Saturday we had an unpleasant encounter with plainclothes police who destroyed some of our tents and asked us to leave," explained Juhan, a 24-year-old demonstrator who says he was beaten by security forces during the incident. Solidarity despite a curfew The sit-in at the Human Rights park gathers pace but it is far from being the only place where local Tunisians demonstrate. Conversations in the crowded terraces alongside the main avenue of the Tunisian capital are often interrupted by slogans against repression in Syria and also in neighboring Libya.  Tunisians have been showing solidarity with people in Libya The arrival of tourists may have diminished considerably in the last months but the country has been flooded with refugees from the other side of the border since the beginning of the insurrection against Moammar Gadhafi. Banners and stickers displaying Libya's pre-Gadhafi flag are recurrent in shops and kiosks in Bourghiba boulevar, but t-shirts boasting the "Free Libya" logo are best sellers - a graphic example of the sympathy the Libyan rebels generate among local Tunisians. Nonetheless, the barbed wire and armoured vehicles still deployed along the main boulevard speak volumes about the current situation in the streets of Tunis. "We are still living under a state of emergency with a curfew in force from 12 to 4am," Muhamed Bakr, a local attorney, told Deutsche Welle. Bakr is back in his native Tunis after having spent the last 15 years in exile in Paris. However, the solicitor can hardly hide his concern for the delay of the elections - initially scheduled for July 24 but now postponed until October 23. "It was clear for everybody that July was a very early date given the current situation and, very especially, due to the lack of an electoral census. We have 92 registered political coalitions among which the Islamists and the supporters of the old regime have solid chances of success," explained Bakr. Author: Karlos Zurutuza, Tunis Editor: Rob Mudge


'Tunisia is in a phase full of contradictions' Yadh Ben Achour is the winner of the 2012 International Democracy Award Bonn. The Tunisian lawyer and expert on constitutional law told Deutsche Welle how Islamist forces are gaining strength in his country. Deutsche Welle: Following the revolution against former dictator Ben Ali, you as an expert on public law were given the difficult task of setting the course for a democratic transition in Tunisia. What have you achieved? Yadh Ben Achour: A lot. For instance, we worked out a party law based on pluralism and the equality of sexes. We founded an independent election commission to ensure free and fair elections. We passed laws for the protection of the freedom of the press, based on principles of democratic pluralism. It's now been two years since the revolution. Did the "Jasmin revolution" also achieve its political goals? The revolution is a long-drawn out process, it takes a lot of time and patience. But I believe we have achieved some important goals: pluralism, a constitutional state, democratic principles and free and fair elections - and an open dialogue among political parties and politicians. Of course, that's only a fraction of a major reform agenda. Implementing it will take decades. Your job ended in October 2011 when the Islamist Ennahda party won the Tunisian Constituent Assembly Election. The party has a different political agenda, but you and other lawyers presented the assembly with a draft constitution. How did the Assembly react? Unfortunately, reaction to our draft constitution was very guarded. It was a very progressive draft, more advanced than the ideas harbored by most of the deputies in an assembly dominated by conservative members. For instance, we proposed abolishing the death sentence, adding an explanation along the lines of universal human rights principles. But the Constituent Assembly pursues what is known as 'blank page policies': delegates do not consider proposals by external experts, they only heed their own experts. In my mind, that is a faulty approach. Tunisia has seen some heated debate about the significance of Islam in the political system. This issue isn't even mentioned in your draft constitution. That is true, our blueprint focuses on liberal principles and the protection of human rights - those were the demands made by the revolution. The Tunisian revolution never called for the introduction of sharia, the religious law of Islam, as a basis of state legislation. The Tunisian revolution was never of a religious nature. Your grandfather was a well-known Tunisian Islamic scholar - but you are opposed to a constitution based on sharia. Isn't that a contradiction? No, not at all! There is great disagreement concerning the definition and contents of sharia. From a political point of view, the introduction of certain sharia rules such as the death sentence and stoning is completely unjustifiable. It contradicts the modern concept of humanity. But I wouldn't find consulting sharia law as a moral reference problematic. What do you mean by "moral reference"? What I mean is that Islam is a religion of tolerance and liberty. It guarantees religious minorities freedom of religion and it guarantees people personal freedom. Unfortunately, some people hold on to rigid, archaic rules. Critics accuse you of "laicism" - not a flattering term in the Arab World; some even accuse you of an anti-Islamic attitude. I do not support laicism (secular control of political and social institutions in a society - the ed.). I never urged introducing laicism as a foundation for Tunisia's political system. I also do not propagate the separation of state and religion. But I am vehemently opposed to a political party pursuing policies in the name of Islam. The worst dictatorship can arise when borders between politics and religion become vague and the distribution of powers is cancelled in the name of religion. There was a stealthy re-Islamisation of Tunisian society even under Ben Ali's rule. In the framework of the revolution, we're seeing radical movements such as the Salafists grow stronger. Is that an alarming development? Yes it is, particularly when it is accompanied by violence. In principle, everyone is free to have their own political and religious convictions - that includes the Salafists. The freedom of opinion is a prized democratic achievement! In the meantime, the Salafists have founded their own party. Unfortunately, some Salafist groups do not shy away from violence. To me, it is very alarming that the government isn't consistently taking drastic measures against them. If we allow violence in the name of God, we endanger our democracy and undo our revolution's accomplishments. That doesn't sound like a positive scenario for the future. No one can predict the future. Tunisia is in a difficult phase full of contradictions, mistakes and deviations from the revolution's original demands. We must protect ourselves from these threats and continue our battle for a free country that remains true to the goals of its revolution. Yadh Ben Achour, born in 1945, is a Tunisian lawyer and expert on constitutional law. From March to October 2011, Achour headed the "High Commission for the realisation of the goals of the revolution, political reform and a democratic transition." This interview is a slightly shortened version of an interview conducted by Deutsche Welle in Arabic. On September 6, 2012, Yad Ben Achour was awarded the International Democracy Award Bonn.


Democratic reforms still distant dreams six months into Arab Spring The Arab Spring could turn into a Summer of Discontent as those countries which saw major upheavals and uprisings over the last six months remain as resistant to change as they were before the wave of revolution began. Some countries such as Libya and Syria are still in chaos as opposing sides continue to battle for control while those who have overthrown their dictators, like Tunisia and Egypt, have seen a return to protest over the lack of concrete progress toward reform. Elsewhere, months of simmering discontent still threaten to boil over as autocratic governments struggle to keep a lid on unrest. Tunisia The North African nation was the first to rise up with protests breaking out in Tunis in December of 2010 over unemployment and the lack of political freedoms. The demonstrations soon spread to the rest of the country and in January of this year, mass protests - often violent - rocked the nation. Finally President Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali fled the country and went into exile in Saudi Arabia, leaving Prime Minister Mohammed Ghannouchi to announce an interim national unity government to rule in Ben Ali's place.  Violent clashes have returned to the streets of Tunisia However, this move only partially satisfied protesters. Despite moves to prosecute Ben Ali in absentia for embezzlement and misusing public funds, the growing belief that the caretaker administration has done little to implement revolutionaries' demands has gradually led to a return to protests. A sit-in by protestors in March which led to the disbanding of the first interim government and the resignation of Ghannouchi prompted the creation of a second caretaker government which took control with promises to elect a constitutional council on July 24. But the unrest has continued as unemployment continues to rise. Only last week the Tunisian capital was plunged back into turmoil under the heavy smog of teargas as hundreds of protestors engaged in pitched battles with riot police. "Tunisia needs a mechanism to manage the diversity and the vacuum created by regime collapse," Nadim Shehadi, a Middle East Expert at Chatham House told Deutsche Welle. "Political society has been suppressed for decades and needs to be rehabilitated. There are important issues of transitional justice, what to do with the old regime, how to promote reconciliation and help heal the wounds and allow society to move on." Egypt A similar situation is unfolding in Egypt, the second country to experience an Arab Spring. Former President Hosni Mubarak's 30-year rule ended on February 11 after 18 days of bloody demonstrations which led to Vice President Omar Suleiman transferring authority to the Supreme Council of the Armed Forces (SCAF). The SCAF then promised to make way for a democratically-elected civilian government toward the end of the year which seemed to appease the protestors.  Despite Mubarak's downfall, Egypt is still in turmoil  But that journey now appears to have been derailed after the SCAF announced a delay of up to two months for the parliamentary elections, leading to thousands of demonstrators descending on public squares around the country just as they did at the start of the year in protest against Mubarak's rule. The protestors accuse the SCAF of reneging on promises and ignoring revolutionary demands while shielding elements of the old regime. Tensions are also high over continuing low wages and unemployment. "In both Tunisia and Egypt the initial successes of the uprisings in sweeping away the dictatorial leaderships have since foundered on the networks of crony capitalists and embedded interests that are proving almost impossible to dislodge," Dr. Kristian Ulrichsen, a Middle East expert at the London School of Economics, told Deutsche Welle. Syria Syria also saw fledgling protests against the regime of President Bashar al-Assad begin in January but the uprising there fully got underway in March with unprecedented protests across the country. Demonstrators calling for greater political freedoms, civil liberties and democracy were soon met with the full force of the Syrian security apparatus. Despite many deaths and the violent crackdown, protests have continued, specifically in the capital Damascus where last Friday's demonstration was among the largest since the uprising began.  Anti-regime anger is growing in Syria despite the crackdown  The al-Assad regime has been widely criticized for its crackdown by the international community - which has so far been loath to intervene - but remains in a position of power within its own borders due to its heavy-handed response. Opposition groups say that more than 2,000 civilians have been killed since the unrest began. "The national dialogue between the government and opposition leaders has failed and opposition figures are losing credibility in the eyes of the diaspora opposition," Middle East analyst and commentator Dr. Elizabeth Iskander told Deutsche Welle. "As far as we can understand, the momentum of the Syrian street is no longer under the control of these opposition figures." Libya Libya's uprising soon escalated into a civil war and an international conflict. Starting with a series of peaceful protests in the city of Benghazi and the capital Tripoli on February 15, the situation quickly escalated when the regime of Colonel Moammar Gadhafi launched a militarized crackdown. While calm in Tripoli was restored by force, Benghazi soon slipped out of government control to become the base for an anti-government rebellion. The rebels, which set up an alternative government body - the National Transitional Council - then began engaging Gadhafi's forces with the objective to overthrow his government and hold democratic elections.  Libyan rebels have made gains but the war is far from over  Recently the US and other nations officially recognized the National Transitional Council as the legitimate political authority in Libya. After six weeks of stalemate, with little movement on the battlefield, rebel fighters announced at the weekend that they were closing in on the key government-held oil town of Brega while rebels in the western Nafusa Mountains say they have made significant gains toward Tripoli. However, NATO support and weapons remain vital to the rebels' cause. Meanwhile, the prospects for peace look grim. Gadhafi refuses to entertain any proposal which requires him to stand down and has rebuffed initiatives from the African Union and Russia which included the rebels' main condition for peace - Gadhafi's removal. Reports last week suggested that an increasingly desperate Gadhafi had a plan to blow up Tripoli if the capital looked to be falling into the hands of the rebels. "The international community made a rush to judgement in condemning the Gadhafi regime and embracing the rebels and this may be coming back to haunt them as the regime proves far more resilient than expected," Ulrichsen said. "The rebels display signs that they are unable to speak for large parts of Libyan society and it is by no means clear that they represent a clear alternative to the existing Gadhafi regime. This bodes ill for the future of Libya as a united polity." Read more about the current state of the Arab Spring


Yadh Ben Achour receives the International Democracy Prize Bonn The president of Tunisia’s Higher Authority for Realisation of the Objectives of the Revolution, Political Reform and Democratic Transition is, after Václav Havel and Shirin Ebadi, the third recipient of the prize. "With that we honor his outstanding role in the transition from dictatorship to democratic elections," said Erik Bettermann, Director General of Deutsche Welle and chairman of the prize association, at the award ceremony in Bonn. Professor Yadh Ben Achour (67) had made an outstanding contribution to democratization and human rights in his country, Bettermann said. "His work is driven by the conviction that lasting peace and a free society in Tunisia can only be based on the rule of law. The prize aims to support his political commitment into the future and through Professor Ben Achour to honor all democratic forces in Tunisia." Professor Ben Achour said in his acceptance speech that he dedicates the prize "to those without whom we would not have come to enjoy freedom: the martyrs and wounded of the revolution". He said the award encourages him and his compatriots "to continue the struggle to support our democratic, civil revolution, for its universal human values, based on individual and social rights and the foundations of a modern state based on the rule of law. It gives us that courage in a climate of lacking recognition in our own country and a revolution that seems to be going wrong.” He said the Tunisian revolution had taken place with the understanding that "democracy is not the monopoly of a certain people or culture but a fundamental element of human thought and sentiment". Ben Anchour said it was regrettable that currently the Koran was being interpreted "superficially and literally". Some "use it to justify political violence and terrorism under the name of jihad the way they interpret it, and the discrimination of women under the designation of alleged male superiority". He continued: "We now see the followers of this destructive current trying to destroy the revolution by intimidation and violence. But the Tunisian people are sufficiently alert and were patient long enough to stand up to these forces." In his congratulatory speech, Hans-Jürgen Beerfeltz, State Secretary of the Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperation and Development, emphasized that Ben Achour had been among those who had triggered "the storm of liberty" in the Arab world. He had always "stood up for democratic values" in his academic and political work, Beerfeltz said. With his resignation from the Tunisian constitutional council in 1992 in protest against decisions by President Ben Ali he had decided "against his position and for freedom", he added. Beerfeltz recalled that even before the Tunisian Revolution, Ben Achour had taken the stance that "a law-governed state founded on the basic pillars of democracy and human rights does not in any way contradict the spirit of the Koran". In a personal letter to the prize winner that was read out at the gathering, German Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle said that as the first president of Tunisia’s Higher Authority for Realisation of the Objectives of the Revolution, Political Reform and Democratic Transition, Ben Achour had "worked tirelessly for the respect of human rights and the inclusion of sometimes contradictory expectations and views of the population in the democratic process". The prize of 10,000 euros aims to connect the successful experiences of Germany and international democratic developments. The first recipient was the former Czech president, Václav Havel, in 2009, followed in 2010 by the Iranian lawyer, human rights activist and Nobel Peace Prize laureate, Shirin Ebadi. The International Democracy Prize is awarded at least every two years to an individual or a legal entity for outstanding service to democratization and human rights in their country. Bonn, September 6, 2012


Tunisia's Ben Ali sentenced to life in prison Former Tunisian president Ben Ali has been sentenced to life for his hand in the crackdown against protesters in the country's rebellion last year. But families of the victims are far from content with the result. Tunisia's former leader Zine El Abidine Ben Ali has been sentenced to life imprisonment for his complicity in the murder of demonstrators during the revolution that toppled him in 2011, a judge confirmed on Thursday. Ben Ali was put on trial for his indirect hand in the deaths of 43 protesters altogether and the injuring of 97 others. But although Hedi Ayari of the Tunis military court said on Thursday that Ben Ali had been given the life sentence, the judgment was passed with Ben Ali in absentia. The former leader fled to Saudi Arabia in January 2011, a month after the uprising against his regime gathered powerful momentum. The ex-Tunisian strongman was judged along with around 40 of his former colleagues. They included General Ali Seriati, who served as Ben Ali's head of presidential security. Seriati was hit with 20 years in prison. Former interior minister Rafik Belhaj Kacem was also put on the docks. He was handed a 15 year sentence. But the case against Ahmed Friaa, another ex-interior minister, bucked the trend - his case was dismissed. Overall, the rulings failed to satisfy the families of the victims, who reacted by insisting that the sentences had been too lenient. They also expressed their anger at the collapse of the case against Friaa. More than 300 people died altogether in the popular rebellion in Tunisia that eventually led to former president Ben Ali's ousting. Ben Ali has now been handed several criminal sentences through three parallel trials against him. He has so far been found guilty on charges that include abuse of power, illegal possession of weapons and illegal possession of narcotics. sej/slk (AFP, Reuters)


'The Islamists can be democratic' A hefty debate has erupted in several Arab Spring nations over the drafting of new constitutions and what role Sharia will play. Tunisian legal scholar Imen Gallala-Arndt says a consensus will have to be reached. Imen Gallala-Arndt was born in Tunisia in 1975, and studied in Tunis and Heidelberg, Germany. Her main areas of research are international and national civil law as well as the family and inheritance laws of Jewish and Christian communities in Islamic nations. She is currently working for the Max Planck Institute for Comparative and International Private Law in Hamburg. DW: The moderate Islamist party Ennahda emerged as the clear victors in elections to the Constituent Assembly in Tunisia last year. How do you assess their policies to date? Imen Gallala-Arndt: Initially, Ennahda's statements were the source of great confusion, because some of them were threatening in tone and party leaders were saying things that contradicted statements issued by other members. This was deeply unsettling for the people of Tunisia as well as for other political figures. For example Sadok Chourou, one of the hardliners within the Ennahda movement in the constituent assembly, criticized individuals who had demonstrated against the government, and underpinned his attack with a verse out of the Koran. He described the demonstrators as godless, and said they were destined for hell. It is of course unnerving when religious arguments are used to describe political opponents as infidels. Ennahda also initially insisted that Sharia must be the source of legislation, although it later revised this statement. But these are exactly the kind of views that unsettle the population and mean that it's difficult to gauge what the party stands for. It does of course represent certain principles. But now that it has assumed governmental responsibility, it must learn to be pragmatic. Ennahda still lacks a clear line in this respect. Western discourse often views Sharia as incompatible with constitutional principles. What about the compatibility of Sharia and human rights in Arab nations currently undergoing upheaval? One must bear in mind that Sharia was developed over the course of history by legal scholars taking local social and economic conditions at the time into consideration. There's a difference between that which is viewed as a principle and as an eternal truth in Islamic law, and the sections of the Sharia code that are currently undergoing reappraisal. Polygamy was abolished in Tunisia in 1956, but at the time no one claimed that this represented a break with Sharia. Quite on the contrary: lawmakers invoked the principles of Islamic law with the intention of acting in the interests of progress. It was recognized that the social position of women had changed and that it was in the interests of women as well as of the entire family to adapt the legal position of women in a consistent manner. Islamists demonstrated in Tunis for Sharia law Whenever Islamists enter government, it's not always an immediate indication that they are going to be against women's rights or human rights in general. It's always dependent on the political will of whoever happens to be in power. They can base their approach on Sharia law but at the same time be progressive through a dynamic interpretation of Islamic legal sources and authorize reforms within the framework of Sharia. But of course it all depends on who's carrying out these interpretations, doesn't it? Absolutely. That's exactly where the danger lies. And that's certainly also the reason why people are scared of it. There is no certified security for minorities, women and the weaker members of society. These are more or less dependent on the good will of legal scholars. If the scholars are well disposed to these individuals, then the group concerned will fare well. But if they are not, the disadvantaged have no legal means at their disposal to take action. There is a lack of objectivity, practicality and security for the citizen. He must be able to rely on his rights being guaranteed and respected. After the revolution in Tunisia, debate raged over the secular character of the new constitution. Where is this debate heading? Gallala-Arndt currently researches family and succession law in Islamic countries The debate over Sharia as legislative resource was triggered when Ennahda accepted that this is not enshrined in the constitution as such. This means that Article 1 of the constitution in its current form stays as it is. This purely states that Islam is the religion of the state. So Sharia is not actually mentioned in the Tunisian constitution. Unlike Tunisia, Libya does not have a reference framework for the drawing up of a constitution. Political parties and NGOs are virtually non-existent. Can Tunisia serve as a model here? Yes it can. One example of this is how electoral lists are drawn up. Regulations stipulate a strict parity of the sexes: man, woman, man, woman. The Libyans adopted this concept from the Tunisians. As a neighboring country, Tunisia can certainly serve as a model. But one must also consider the special qualities of Libyan society. This is a society that as a result of Moammar Gadhafi's reign of terror suffers from an acute lack of institutions as well any kind of culture of political debate. But there's also a highly educated youth and an elite that wants this to change. That's why I'm quite confident about Libya. In Egypt Nobel Peace laureate Mohammed ElBaradei is calling for the new constitution to be based on German basic law, in particular with regard to the anchoring of fundamental rights such as freedom of expression and freedom of religion. Is it possible to simply transfer such a model? I don't believe that in the present situation, fundamental rights such as they exist in Germany will also be anchored in this form in the Egyptian constitution. Whether we want it or not, this will be a constitution with many compromises. Secular forces must also accept that Islamic influence will resound through it. The Muslim Brotherhood has a parliamentary majority, and this is a very religious society. "A constitution for all Egyptians" this protester's sign reads What dangers does the process of democratization present to Arab Spring nations? The Islamists can be democratic. But as far as I see it, there is a danger that once they are in power, they could move to restrict human rights or women's rights in particular. But nevertheless I'm not assuming that this will become an urgent problem at the present time. The current situation in Tunisia and also in Egypt is so complicated that there's a great need for consensus solutions. Political actors must first address economic problems and to this end, are forced to make compromises. I think that even though the situation for religious minorities and women may not improve, at least it won't get any worse. Consensus is also sought on these issues. We'll just have to wait and see whether or not Arab Islamists can behave in a democratic fashion, also within their own parties. Interview: Annett Hellwig, Qantara.de Editors: Arian Fariborz / Lewis Gropp, Qantara.de, Sabina Casagrande / Rob Mudge


Tunisia descends into turmoil Two years after the 'Arab Spring' revolution in Tunisia, the country is in turmoil. The economy is paralyzed, and the political, religious and social gulf between Islamists and the secular opposition is growing wider. Hundreds of people have been hurt in protests since the end of November. In the Northern town of Siliana supporters of Tunisia's largest trade union UGTT protested against police abuse and social grievances. In the course of several days, more than 300 people were hurt in clashes with security forces. In the Tunisian capital Tunis, radical Islamists attacked members of the UGTT, who were gathered outside the union's headquarters on December 4 to mark the 60th anniversary of the assassination of its founder. Elsewhere in the country the situation is tense. Two years after the beginning of the rebellion that became known as the 'Arab Spring', the country has still not found peace. The self-immolation of a Tunisian vegetable vendor triggered the initial wave of discontent and protests that quickly spread across the Middle East. Mohamed Bouaziz had set himself on fire to protest against the authorities which had confiscated his vegetable stall. The news quickly spread and Tunisians in towns all over the country vented their anger over corruption, officials' arbitrary behavior and the general lack of economic perspectives. Tunisia's President Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali fled the country in early 2011, setting the stage for a painstaking political reorganization. The Islamic Ennahda party emerged victorious from the elections in October 2011. Divided society Protests in Siliana Tunesia Tunisia is increasingly polarized. The Ennahda and Salafits groups want to give greater political and social importance to Islam. The opposition, comprised of several parties and the influential trade union UGTT, views this with concern. “Battlelines are being drawn”, William Lawrence from the International Crisis Group told Deutsche Welle. “It is increasingly clear that Tunisian society is lining up on one side or the other. Things are definitely getting more tense in Tunisia these days”, said Lawrence, who heads the North Africa Department, referring to ongoing strikes and violence by Salafists against secular targets. Radwan Masmoudi, who heads the Center for the Study of Islam and Democracy in Washington, agrees that there is an ever greater gulf dividing the two sides. “People are afraid of each other: The Islamists are afraid of the secularists and the secularists are afraid of the Islamists.” He told Deutsche Welle that there was a lot of “residual fear” on both sides. “The Islamists have suffered for 30 years from oppression and torture.” Secularlists, he added, were afraid that the Islamists in power might imitate the Iranian or Saudi Arabian model. “The key is to encourage dialogue and find a consensus.” The center Masmoudi chairs organizes round table discussions. When the debate is public, Masmoudi says, it tends to be heated. But turn the microphones off – and both sides manage to engage constructively. Economic crisis overshadows political turmoil But these social conflicts are overshadowed by the economic crisis. Two years ago, the anger spilled onto the streets when hundreds of thousands demonstrated against unemployment and the dictatorship's nepotism. One of the protesters main rallying calls – besides freedom and dignity – was jobs. Young university graduates without any perspective of ever finding work were the driving force behind the revolution. But their situation hasn't improved. “One of the major causes of revolution was corruption and it is absolutely unclear if any of this corruption has been attenuated”, says Crisis Group analyst Lawrence. Until the revolution, the families of President Ben Ali and his wife Leila Trabelsi “had their hands in about 180 of the top-200-firms in Tunisia. And when those families ran away, power was transferred to new interests but it is not clear how corrupt those new interests are”, Lawrence says. What is more, according to the Middle East expert, neither Ennahda nor its coalition partners, have any great experience in economic policies. Calls for European support Confrontation with the Tunis trade union, UCTT In order to kick-start its languishing economy, Tunisia depends on support from abroad. Lawrence and Masmoudi agree that Europe could do more for the country. But, in the aftermath of the revolution, many European companies fled – and continue to flee – Tunisia, Lawrence says: “They leave for good reasons: unrest, strikes and threats of violence.” He is convinced that Tunisia has to create a “hospitable environment” for the European companies that Tunisia so badly needs. But, Lawrence says, more is needed than just an inflow of money. Tunisia requires fundamental structural reforms, he said. Mamsoudi is convinced that it is “critical for European interests that Tunisia succeeds as a model for democracy that shows the way for other Arab countries, like Libya and Egypt how to build a true democracy in the Arab world and in North Africa.” But in order to achieve that, Europe should support Tunisia in its difficult transition period, “in the same way that Europe helped Eastern Europe after the collapse of the Soviet Union.”


Press freedom is under pressure in Tunisia Journalists in Tunisia have gone on strike for the first time since the country won its independence. They accuse the government of restricting freedom of speech. Is press freedom in danger after the revolution? Several hundred journalists rallied outside their union's headquarters in Tunis earlier this week, chanting "Freedom for Tunisia's press." Union members from abroad as well as Tunisian opposition politicians also turned out to support the activists. The nationwide strike dominates the talk on radio and television, and the banner of the national journalist union, SNJT, can be clearly seen on numerous websites. Fear of returning to former practices More than 90 percent of Tunisian journalists have joined the strike, according to the journalists' union. A poster in Tunis calls for press freedom The journalists accuse the government of trying to bring the media under its control. "Press freedom is the most important achievement of the January 14 revolution and now it's at risk," said SNJT member Zied El Heni, who fears a return to the practices of the Ben Ali government. Following the revolution that took place on January 14, 2011, the former propaganda media of the Ben Ali regime were supposed to become independent newspapers and broadcasters. But the government, under the leadership of the conservative Islamic Ennahda party voted into power a year ago, has replaced the heads of the broadcasters and former state-run press organizations in recent months. The new directors, journalists argue, are friendly to the Ennahda party or to the former regime and intervene directly in programs and press coverage. Such intervention is illegal under Tunisia's new press laws, which were drafted shortly after the revolution. New media laws Heni accuses the government coalition of trying to control the media through the new directors. "They want to return to the days when there was only one way to report and only one way to think," he said. Nizar Dridi is one of seven journalists on a hunger strike In addition to replacing the new directors and applying the new laws, the journalists' union demands a clear separation between editorial staff and management. At the Dar Assabah newspaper company, which publishes two of Tunisia's biggest papers, some of the journalists have been on strike for more than 50 days. Journalists accuse Lotfi Touati, who was appointed by the government as the publisher's new director, of censoring their work. They point out that Touati worked in the notorious Ministry of the Interior in the Ben Ali regime and view him as the instigator of a coup against the leadership of the journalist union. Earlier this month, seven journalists went on a hunger strike. "We began the strike after we exhausted all other peaceful ways of protest," said Nizar Dridi, one of the activists. "We demand the resignation of the new director who meddles in editorial operations. We want to be able to work independently." In their first round of negotiations, the Tunisian UGTT trade union federation and the government failed to reach an agreement. 130 attacks on journalists' freedom Even if working conditions for journalists in Tunisia have improved since the revolution, the press continues to be confronted daily with various obstacles. Since the beginning of the year, the non-governmental organization Reporters Without Borders has registered 130 attacks on journalists' freedom, including censorship by their own directors and attacks by police. That's why it's important for journalists to keep drawing attention to their situation, argues Belhassen Handous from Tunisia's Bureau of Organization. "The strike comes at the right time," he said. Handous calls for the new media laws, which have been in limbo for nearly year, to be applied. "Even though the laws may need to be revised in some points, we need a legal framework because only that can guarantee freedom of opinion," he said. The Tunisian government has meanwhile responded to the strike, saying in a statement that the hard-fought press laws should be applied immediately. The laws call for, among other things, the establishment of an independent regulator for audiovisual media. In addition, journalists are no longer subject to the penal code. In the past, they were frequently convicted of violating public policy.


Fear of Tunisia's bearded men Following the Jasmine Revolution, Islamists in Tunisia are at liberty to enter the political sphere. But for many citizens, that prospect is not a comfortable one. On the Avenue Habib Bourguiba in Tunis, a group of long-bearded men dressed in flowing robes are actively discussing politics. One of them decries the separation of state and religion as blasphemous, while another bemoans what he calls the "tainted society." Just a few months ago, such opinions uttered in public would have led those men to be rounded up and carted off by the secret police. But that was then, and this is now. The street where the men in white are holding forth takes its name from Habib Bourguiba, the first President of the Tunisian Republic, who ruled the country from 1957 to 1987. A believer in secularism, the founding father of the nation viewed Islamists as an existential threat to his vision of a modern Tunisian state, and therefore prevented them from entering into the political system. His successor, Zine el Abindine Ben Ali, took an equally hard line, and many Islamists sought exile abroad. But, much to some people's unease, the demise of Bourguiba's successor on January 14 has seen them return home - and to the political arena. 'I'm afraid of them'  Cafes along the Avenue Habib Bourguiba openly sell alcohol Cyreen Belhedi and her friends are sitting in one of the numerous cafes along the lively avenue smoking cigarettes and drinking coffee, tea, and even beer. They paint a picture of relaxation and enjoyment - until, that is, they look over to the men with long beards. "I'm afraid of them," says Cyreen who demonstrated every day during the revolution and even lost her job as an engineer as a result. "If those Islamists ever come to power, it will set us back a long way, even further back than Bourguiba's time." Her fears and those of her contemporaries are not so much directed at the bearded men at the far side of the street, but at the Ennahda Party, which after decades in obscurity, is now back and seeking to make its mark. The party's leader and spiritual father, Rachid al Ghannouchi, is well respected in conservative Muslim circles. His writings on political Islam are often cited, and he was arrested for his political activity several times during the era of President Bourguiba. He spent 20 years in exile in London before returning home earlier this year. Unfounded fear?  Rachid al Ghannouchi has returned to Tunisia after years of exile in London  The house in which the now 70-year-old receives his guests is located in a well-kept district on the edge of the city, where a stocky, mustached man in sunglasses guards the door. In the garden, women's and children's clothing hangs from a washing line strung between fruit trees. Men in visibly high spirits move about inside the house, mobile phones pressed to their ears. Journalists and political followers wait for the chance to talk to Sheik Rachid in person. One of these is an older man wearing a Palestinian scarf, who says his devotion to al Ghannouchi meant he spent 16 years in prison and many more in exile. He holds forth on his theory that essentially, everyone in the world is of Arab extraction. "Even Adam was an Arab, so everyone should accept Islam," he enthused. Rachid al Ghannouchi, dressed in a gray suit, white shirt and black leather shoes, receives his visitors on a red Berber carpet in the middle of a large living room. The Al Jazeera television channel is running on a screen in the corner of the room. He says the fear of his party is completely unfounded, and is based on the "business of fear" run by Ben Ali in order to keep political opponents at bay. His party aims to "cleanse the society of the remains of Ben Ali's rule, and to create a free democratic state in which everyone is treated as equals." Seeking distance from al Qaeda He is at pains to distance himself and his party from the violent ideology of al Qaeda. "We have always said, and we say it again today: the activities of al Qaeda are not legitimate, they are terrorism."  Rachid Al-Ghannouchi does not seek to legitimize the September 11 attacks  Unlike the peaceful revolutions in Tunisia and Egypt, he says al Qaeda has not succeeded in bringing down any of the corrupt regimes in the region. "And besides, Islam and the Islamic movement suffer the most under the consequences of the September 11 attacks." He laments the fact that Muslim minorities in the West have been tarred with the suspected terrorist brush, and are "under constant police surveillance." In another café on the Avenue Bourguiba, a spokesman for the more radical Tahrir Party, Rida Belhaj, quietly explains that he doesn't want to talk about the political consequences of the old regime, but about the revolutions in Tunisia and Egypt. Although he considers what has already happened as "important steps towards the liberation of Muslims all over the world," he says the revolutions are not yet over. 'The intentions behind 9/11 were good' Contrary to al Ghannouchi, Belhaj does not seek to distance his party from radical Islamists like al Qaeda. Although he agrees that violence is not the right way forward and that it "does more harm than good," he praises the intentions behind the September 11 attacks. "The thing is though that they had a negative impact because unlike the West, Muslims do not have the same media opportunities to convince people about their intentions." His own intentions are quite clear. His party's goal is for a Tunisian state in which Islam is the source of all laws.  Cyreen Belhedi, right, and her friends do not want to live under Islamic rule  Cyreen and her friends have now move to another café and are making a list of all the people who could not live in such an Islamic state. "All Tunisians who like to go to bars for a beer in the evening," one of the group calls out. "All women who like to swim in bikinis, and all men who like to look at women bathing in bikinis," says another. "A healthy majority then," a third chips in, and everyone laughs. But then Cyreen grows serious. "If the Islamists did take power here, we would all have to emigrate and our revolution would have been for nothing." Author: Khalid El Kaoutit / tkw Editors: Jennifer Abramsohn/Rob Mudge


International media grapples with root causes of Berlin attack The international media has many takes on Monday night's tragic events in Berlin. One thing has been clear in all the commentaries that have been written: the challenges are huge. The journey of alleged terrorist Anis Amri ended near Milan - on a slab of asphalt in the municipality of Sesto San Giovanni, to be exact. "His corpse," writes the Italian newspaper Corriere della Sera, "is the emblem of a crazy and tragic journey that began five years ago and stands for many aspects of the new threat we face. Maybe he even represents all the aspects." The corpse on the street stands for illegal immigration, religious radicalization and terrorism. Added to this is the incapability of German authorities to send people like Anis Amri back to their home country. "And so a person who was classified as dangerous by security forces was able to maintain his contacts with other militants, who probably helped him in the mobilization phase of this deed." Anis Amri is also a symbol of a global problem, writes the newspaper La Repubblica. "It is terrorism that can unexpectedly hit any place: France, Belgium, Germany, the USA, India, Indonesia and the Philippines. The terrorists' motives are linked to the size of the Islamic community in the country they live in, the degree of integration, and the competence of security forces." But there is one more phenomenon, writes Repubblica: the banlieue, meaning the impoverished suburbs of large cities. This is where many uprooted people live. It is home to "the fight of an angry class whose members find terrorism appealing." One country, two stories At the same time, the biography of the terrorist Amri also sheds light on the situation in Tunisia. The North African country can tell two stories, writes the British Telegraph. On the one hand, there is the story of the revolution that has led to happy and successful democratic conditions. "The other is about how a generation of young men and women have been marginalized and subjected to the threat of radicalization over many years. Many Tunisian people are reluctant to tell these stories." Instead, they prefer to point out the seductive power of international jihadism. But this does not absolve them of responsibility. Amri's career reveals something else, says the Telegraph, "which is the ever closer link between crime and radicalization, two areas that are increasingly overlapping." Security forces across Europe were placed on high alert after the Berlin attack 'General anger' The London-based Arabic newspaper Asharq al-Awsat says that material conditions initially disappointed many refugees in Germany. "The large halls in which they live are hardly suitable for a decent life. Hundreds of people sleep in makeshift accommodation - windowless rooms, which although cleaned and well-maintained, have walls that are not high enough to close off the individual bunk beds entirely and therefore allow even the slightest noise to resound throughout the hall." It is actually quite easy to find a story to explain the terrorist attacks. "The story of a dangerous journey though the Balkan route to Germany, the long wait for decisions being made by overwhelmed authorities, a joyless existence in a defunct airport without prospects of finding work, combined with petty crime, Islamist propaganda on the internet, and at the end, the attack." It is an attack that also upset Tunisians, according to the website G Net. "The news gives you goose bumps. The shock is collective; there is general anger. The name of a Tunisian has been added to the list of those who spread fear through international terror. Helpless and powerless, we can only be ashamed for those who sully our reputation in front of the entire world." Threatening polarization The Arabic language newspaper Al-Araby Al-Jadeed writes that the attacks could have other consequences. "It feeds the fear of Europeans that their countries are no longer safe from terrorism, which is increasingly threatening them. The series of attacks with dozens left dead could indeed undermine the sense of security. That leaves governments with the difficult task of striking an appropriate balance between peace and freedom." And this, in turn, poses another danger. "The first beneficiaries of these events are those who polarize European societies: the right-wing extremists and the slander campaigns against Muslims. All indicators point to the fact that right-leaning parties will be sitting in European parliaments after the coming elections." But it hasn't come to that yet, Asharq al-Awsat, one of the largest Arabic-language papers in the world, assures its readers. "The incident will not change the vibrant, unsentimental and mostly tolerant atmosphere in Berlin, this wild and mischievous city. Berlin will mourn, as it has so often in the past, and then it will move on." Thousands of potential jihadists The Spanish paper El Pais assumes that Angela Merkel sees things this way too. She too is aware of the seductive powers of the selected information populists present. "But she also knows that they do not deal with the root of the problem; so she confronts them with the force of moral conviction, no matter how unpopular it may be. By doing so, she is turning into the only political leader worthy of the title." At the same time, European states face great challenges, writes the Spanish newspaper El Mundo. This also applies to safety measures. "But we must not forget that absolute security is impossible." The roughly 22,000 potential jihadists – according to estimates made by security services in Europe – show us the scale of the danger we face."


Security conference ends with calls to isolate Syria Tunisia, the birthplace of the Arab Spring revolutions, has called on all countries to recall their ambassadors from Syria to punish the government there for killing civilian protesters. Tunisian Prime Minister Hamadi Jebali has called on the international community to follow his country's example by cutting off diplomatic ties with Syria because of its ongoing crackdown on protesters. On the final day of the Munich Security Conference on Sunday, Jebali said the international community owed it to the Syrian people to show its opposition to the violence perpetrated by government forces. "The Syrian people do not expect long statements from us today," he said. "They expect deeds, they expect concrete measures." Tunisia, the first country to overthrow its dictator in the Arab Spring uprisings, said it was expelling Syrian diplomats and withdrawing its recognition of President Bashar al-Assad's government. Jebali also criticized China and Russia for vetoing a resolution in the UN Security Council that would have condemned the violence and called on Assad to step down, saying the veto was "a right that was misused." His calls were echoed by Yemeni activist and Nobel Peace Prize winner Tawakkul Karman, who said Beijing and Moscow "bear the moral and human responsibility for these massacres." "I urge you in the name of the peaceful rebels to expel Syrian ambassadors from your countries and I urge you to call back your ambassadors in Damascus," Karman told conference delegates. "That is the minimum you can do to punish this regime, and I also urge you to take the necessary measures to protect the Syrian people." Disagreement on Iran Meanwhile the subject of Iran also aroused debate on the security conference's panel covering the "new Middle East," as the broad disagreement among the international community becomes clear. The United States and the EU have imposed tough economic sanctions on Iran, aiming to halt its uranium enrichment program, which the West fears is meant to build a nuclear bomb. However Turkish Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu said of the three options the international community is discussing - negotiations, sanctions or military intervention - negotiations were the best route. "The military option will create a disaster in our region," he said. Recent media reports have said Israel, Iran's arch-enemy, is contemplating preemptively bombing Iran's nuclear facilities. Israeli officials have declined to comment publicly on their plans, but Israeli Deputy Foreign Minister Danny Ayalon said the risks of new military conflict in the Middle East "would be dwarfed in comparison to the danger of a nuclear Iran." "One thing is clear," he told Reuters news agency in Munich. "If Iran becomes nuclear, then it's the end of the world order as we know it… This is what we have to think about, and not about what will happen in case some action is being taken." acb/za (AP, AFP, dpa)


Tunisia's Islamists look set to score high in elections As the birthplace of the Arab Spring, Tunisia is something of a yardstick in the region. All eyes will be on the North African country on Sunday when it stages its first post-revolution elections. After decades of polls in which the results were a foregone conclusion, Tunisians are now poised to take part in a democratic ballot to elect an assembly responsible for drawing up a new constitution. But with more than 100 parties and 1,400 candidates - 583 of which are independents and almost all of which have been campaigning on platforms of freedom, democracy and social justice - in the running, voters could easily be overcome by choice paralysis. Middle East expert at the Berlin-based Institute for International and Security Affairs Asiem El Difraoui told Deutsche Welle it is quite normal to see so many parties and candidates standing for election after a 30-year dictatorship. "There is no culture of political compromise in Tunisia," he said. "But ultimately larger political groupings will be formed." Political Islam Analysts expect the 217-member assembly to be comprised of representatives from 10 or so parties. Besides writing the new constitution, they will be charged with appointing a caretaker government to oversee the running of the country during the drafting phase, and with organizing fresh elections thereafter.  The Tunisian electorate is spoilt for choice The Islamic Ennahda party, which was repressed under the regime of Zine el Abidine Ben Ali, is tipped to win the largest block of votes in the ballot for which only half the country's 7.3 million eligible voters have registered to take part. In the run-up to the poll, Ennahda has been vocal on its commitment to democratic principles and women's rights. Secret agenda fears Although some observers see the party as a chance for a moderate form of political Islam, secular critics say Ennahda is simply talking the talk and would waste no time in imposing a theocracy, with no regard for the personal status code introduced into Tunisia in 1956. The rules of the Code, which broke new ground in the Middle East, set a minimum age for wedlock, stated that both parties to a marriage had to be consenting, forbade polygamy, abolished a wife's obligation to be obedient to her husband, and instituted a legal procedure for divorce.  Salafists demonstrate to defend the right for women to cover up  Fears of a hidden Ennahda agenda have been fueled by Salafist conservative attacks on television stations and cinemas they claim show material that is offensive to Muslims. The most recent such incident occurred at the weekend, but the party has denied any involvement. Party split Nonetheless, Klaus Loetzer, head of the Konrad-Adenauer-Stiftung office for Tunisia and Algeria says there are different ideologies within the Islamic party. "Some are more interested in following the Turkish model, and want the division of church and state," he told Deutsche Welle, adding that others seek unity between the two. "They want shari'ah as a basis for governance and the country's legal framework." Human rights activist have called for protest action to prevent what they describe as the "bearded men" from taking power. Main contenders One of the other two main groupings comprises the young revolutionaries so pivotal in ousting the apparently entrenched dictator 10 months ago. They want a highly modern Tunisia, but have no experience of party politics. Not so the Progressive Democratic Party (PDP) which was in opposition during Ben Ali's era. Although leader Ahmed Nejib Chebbi was a staunch critic of the former dictator, the party is perceived as the unofficial successor to his Rassemblement Constitutionel Democratique (RCD).  Nejib Chebbi's PDP is expected to take a large share of votes  Opinion polls suggest that many Tunisians who are planning to vote, have yet to decide which way to cast their ballot. But so far, the PDP looks set to garner the second largest share. Economic struggles Whoever emerges victorious on Sunday will have their work cut out for them. The Tunisian economy has suffered greatly as a result of the political upheaval, not least because tourists are giving the country a wider than usual berth. And jobs are still in short supply. El Difraoui says the biggest challenge facing any caretaker government will be to improve the general standard of living and to "quickly improve the economic situation." And for the first time in decades, the people who are affected by the laws of the land, have the chance to influence the way things go from here. Author: Anne Allmeling / tkw Editor: Rob Mudge


In Tunisia, returning migrants find a ray of hope As the European Union searches for solutions to its migrant crisis, a program for returning migrants in Tunisia boasts a stunning success rate. But the bigger picture is grim. Elizabeth Bryant reports from Zarzis. Not so long ago, Imed Zouaga was working 13-hour days at a Paris-area factory, paid under the table as an illegal immigrant. At first, the long hours and loneliness seemed better than the alternative: weathering the post-revolution turmoil gripping his native Tunisia. But during a vacation back home to this sun-washed port town, Zouaga decided to stay. "It was hard in France," says the 49-year-old father of three, "and I missed my children." Today, Zouaga is back at his old job, driving a long-distance taxi from Zarzis to the capital Tunis, 550 kilometers (340 miles) north. Instead of hiring a vehicle, as he did before, he is now the proud owner of a smart red-and-white striped van, thanks to a program for returning migrants bankrolled by the French government. Zouaga (left) does not regret returning home from France Launched in 2009, it offers training to students and workers who agree to come home. Some are given seed money to open up small businesses; others land internships with Tunisian companies. "It's not easy to convince Tunisians who have left to study or work to return," says Stephane Darmas, director of the French Office of Immigration and Integration in Tunisia, which runs the program. "That's why we have different programs to encourage them to develop the businesses the country needs." The French initiative underscores growing European Union efforts to find solutions to a migrant crisis that has brought more than a quarter of a million people to its shores this year - on top of the massive surge in 2015. Hostility towards foreigners is also growing, partly fuelled by the recent attacks in Germany and France. The assailant in July's truck rampage in the Riviera city of Nice, for example, was a Tunisian migrant. Managing migration Beyond an EU-Turkey migrant deal struck earlier this year, individual member states are trying to limit migration on their own terms. Germany, which accepted more than one million asylum-seekers last year, and is considering declaring "safe" several North African countries, including Tunisia, to make it easier to deport those who come illegally. The EU is also establishing a "partnership framework" that offers countries on the front lines of the exodus new incentives to better control their borders. "The framework of these agreements very much focuses on migration management and incentivizing countries to cooperate in terms of managing their own borders, and also taking back either their own nationals or third-country nationals who have traveled to the EU," says analyst Susan Fratzke of the Migration Policy Institute, a Washington-based nonprofit specializing in migration issues. Thousands of Tunisians left in the wake of the Arab Spring, looking for opportunity in Europe While roughly 10 percent of Tunisians live abroad, mostly in France, this tiny North African country is hardly Europe's biggest headache. Yet it may offer a telling tale of what comes next. For those returning home - ultimately very few, experts say - or those who never left, the prospects are bleak. Five years ago, as Tunisia's landmark revolution touched off the broader Arab Spring uprising, thousands set off on rickety boats from towns like Zarzis, taking advantage of lax border controls to try their luck in Europe. Today, the country's situation is perhaps even more precarious. Rising insecurity, including several terror attacks, has driven away tourists and foreign investment. In the poorest regions - which include Tunisia's southern Medenine governorate where Zarzis is located - up to one-quarter or more youngsters are jobless. The percentage is even higher when it comes to college graduates. Earlier this year, protests over jobs and lack of economic opportunities spread like wildfire across the country. No silver bullet "Everything is blocked in Tunisia," says Abdelbasset Abdelmoumen, a former geology teacher who earned a Master's degree in 2004, but is now looking for work. "Fixing unemployment is a real problem, especially for those of us with diplomas." Part of a broader migration deal between France and Tunisia, the French training program offers a ray of hope. "We can say it's a success," says Faycal Dchicha, president of ADDCI, a Tunisian NGO managing the initiative in Medenine. Nearly all the start-up businesses are still running, he says, thanks to its hands-on philosophy. "Youngsters are not just looking for financial support, but also for moral support and supervision," he says. Dchicha says the project has been a success but more should be done to help young Tunisians Yet Dchicha is the first to admit the project is no silver bullet. Fewer than 500 people have graduated from the course to date. "I think you need to do a great project of development that offers more chance for young people here," he says, describing untapped opportunities in developing solar energy sector and organic farming. Migration policy analyst Fratzke agrees that a broader strategy is needed if migration's root causes are to be addressed. But this may not be the time to find it. "Right now, the European public wants immediate results," she says. "When you're looking at large-scale infrastructure and development projects, the results are anything but short term."


Serbian non-violence group shares know-how with Egyptian activists The Egyptian protesters who toppled President Mubarak weren't just inspired by their Tunisian neighbors: They also got inspiration and advice from the Serbian youth movement that helped bring down Slobodan Milosevic. Egyptian protesters ended President Hosni Mubarak's 30-year rule through strategic mass mobilization and effective but non-violent resistance. Some of those activists were inspired by a Serbian group called "Otpor," which means resistance. Otpor had a significant role in the overthrowing of Slobodan Milosevic in 2000, and its member have since founded the non-governmental organization the Center for Applied NonViolent Action and Strategies (CANVAS). Through CANVAS, the non-violent legacy of Otpor lives on and has inspired revolutionaries in Georgia, Ukraine and now Egypt. They provide guides to non-violent resistance in multiple languages, and their book "Nonviolent Struggle - 50 Crucial Points" has been downloaded tens of thousands of times and was translated into Arabic and Farsi in 2009. The Egyptian opposition group the April 6 Youth Movement - named for their 2008 worker strike, which was violently suppressed - met with Otpor activists in Belgrade. There they gathered the important know-how they then put into action on January 28 when they peacefully took over Tahrir Square in Cairo, despite massive efforts by the police to stop them. They even use the same raised fist logo of Otpor and CANVAS. A spreading movement?   Former Otpor member Srdjan Milivojevic is now a member of the Democratic Party in Serbia and told Deutsche Welle he's not surprised that the group's ideas live on in other revolutions. Popovic praised the Egyptians for their non-violence  "I'm totally convinced that Otpor's core concept, namely the non-violent struggle against a dictatorship and the non-violent struggle for change under a non-democratic regime, is exciting to people who yearn for freedom around the world," he said. The head of CANVAS and another former Otpor member, Srdja Popovic, said he was impressed by the Egyptians' "disciplined non-violence." They denied the regime's hoped for escalation with their pacifism, he said. "The Egyptian protest movement has shown in an inspiring way that in these Arab countries there's an enormous potential for resistance that can develop into a pan-Arab movement," he added. Author: Ivica Petrovic / hf Editor: Nancy Isenson


Tunisia: Workshop for radio journalists After the revolution in Tunisia, DW Akademie held its first workshop on election reporting in the capital, Tunis. The partner on location was the Friedrich Ebert Foundation. "The reforms in Tunisia are not happening fast enough for many of the people there," says Michael Tecklenburg, deputy head of DW Akademie's Africa division. He has just returned from the country and says the situation is once again coming to a head. Riots occurred again in Tunis at the beginning of May. The seasoned journalist was in the capital to open a two-week workshop for radio journalists on May 3rd, which coincided with World Press Freedom Day. The training focused on election reporting.  Journalists from seven state-run and private radio stations located in the capital and in rural areas took part. "We want to demonstrate a presence in the provincial regions and in future become active there as well." Journalists receive little support in these regions even though their role is gaining significance, Tecklenburg says. "Until now the media were centrally controlled from Tunis. Now they can report independently." One primary aim of the DW Akademie training workshop was to prepare journalists to produce balanced reports on the elections, politicians and their agendas so listeners can actively take part in the democratic process. Politicians and political experts were also invited to the workshop. "This was also about communicating and becoming more aware of each other," Tecklenburg explains. "In all, the project is to help establish the Tunisian media not just as the Fourth Estate, but as the fourth pillar of democracy."  The 14-day workshop was run by two experienced trainers: Carine Debrabandère, a DW Radio journalist, and Rüdiger Maack, the former ARD (German public broadcasting network) bureau chief in Rabat, Morocco.  The Friedrich Ebert Foundation (FES) in Tunis contributed to the workshop in terms of content, logistics, funding and above all, local expertise. "The FES is well- established in Tunisia and has a very good network. This was extremely helpful during this critical situation," Tecklenburg says.  That is crucial for the future direction of DW Akademie projects in Tunisia. Further joint workshops are planned with a focus on the role and the future of public broadcasting in this budding democracy.


Tunisia: Workshop for radio journalists After the revolution in Tunisia, DW-AKADEMIE held its first workshop on election reporting in the capital, Tunis. The partner on location was the Friedrich Ebert Foundation. “The reforms in Tunisia are not happening fast enough for many of the people there,” says Michael Tecklenburg, deputy head of DW-AKADEMIE’s Africa division. He has just returned from the country and says the situation is once again coming to a head. Riots occurred again in Tunis at the beginning of May. The seasoned journalist was in the capital to open a two-week workshop for radio journalists on May 3rd, which coincided with World Press Freedom Day. The training focused on election reporting. Journalists from seven state-run and private radio stations located in the capital and in rural areas took part. “We want to demonstrate a presence in the provincial regions and in future become active there as well.” Journalists receive little support in these regions even though their role is gaining significance, Tecklenburg says. “Until now the media were centrally controlled from Tunis. Now they can report independently.” One primary aim of the DW-AKADEMIE training workshop was to prepare journalists to produce balanced reports on the elections, politicians and their agendas so listeners can actively take part in the democratic process. Politicians and political experts were also invited to the workshop. “This was also about communicating and becoming more aware of each other,” Tecklenburg explains. “In all, the project is to help establish the Tunisian media not just as the Fourth Estate, but as the fourth pillar of democracy.” The 14-day workshop was run by two experienced trainers: Carine Debrabandère, a DW-RADIO journalist, and Rüdiger Maack, the former ARD (German public broadcasting network) bureau chief in Rabat, Morocco. The Friedrich Ebert Foundation (FES) in Tunis contributed to the workshop in terms of content, logistics, funding and above all, local expertise. “The FES is well- established in Tunisia and has a very good network. This was extremely helpful during this critical situation,” Tecklenburg says. That is crucial for the future direction of DW-AKADEMIE projects in Tunisia. Further joint workshops are planned with a focus on the role and the future of public broadcasting in this budding democracy.


International media reflect on the Berlin terror attack International media have many takes on Monday night's tragic events in Berlin. One thing has been clear in all the commentaries that have been written: The challenges are huge. The journey of alleged terrorist Anis Amris ended near Milan - on a patch of asphalt in the municipality of Sesto San Giovani, to be exact. "His corpse," writes the Italia newspaper "Corriere della Sera," "is the emblem of a crazy and tragic journey that began five years ago and stands for many aspects of the new threat we face. Maybe he even represents all the aspects." Illegal immigration, religious radicalization and terrorism: all of this was encapsulated by this body in the street, the paper said. Added to this was the incapability of German authorities to send people like Anis Amri back to their home country, it wrote, adding: "And so a person who was classified as dangerous by security forces was able to maintain his contacts with other militants who probably encouraged him in the phase of mobilization that precedes every such deed." Anis Amri is also a symbol of a global problem, writes the newspaper "La Repubblica." "It is terrorism that can unexpectedly hit anywhere: France, Belgium, Germany, the USA, India, Indonesia and the Philippines. The terrorists' motives depend on the size of the Islamic community in the country they live in, the degree of integration and the competence of security forces." But there is one more phenomenon, writes "Repubblica": the "banlieus," meaning the impoverished suburbs of large cities. This was where many uprooted people lived, it said, fostering "the fight of an angry class whose members find terrorism appealing." One country, two stories At the same time, the life story of the terrorist Amri also sheds light on the situation in Tunisia. The North African country can tell two stories, writes the British "Telegraph." On one hand, there is the story of the revolution that has led to happy and successful democratic conditions. "The second story is of how over many years a generation of young men and women was marginalized and exposed to radicalization, and this is a story that many in Tunisia are still reluctant to admit. " Instead, they prefer to point out the seductive power of international jihadism. But this does not absolve them of responsibility, the paper says: Amri's career reveals something else, being "evidence of an increasingly common link between criminality and radicalization; the two communities often overlap in recruitment." Security is tight throughout Europe, as here in front of Milan's cathedral 'General anger' The London-based Arabic newspaper "Asharq al-Awsat" says that material conditions initially disappointed many refugees in Germany, many of whom end up "sleeping in makeshift, windowless enclosures that - though clean and well-supplied - have walls that don't reach the high ceiling and echo with the slightest sound." It was thus actually quite easy to find a story to explain how terrorism was engendered, the paper said. "The story of a dangerous journey via the Balkan route to Germany, the long wait for decisions being made by overwhelmed authorities, a joyless existence in a defunct airport without prospects of finding work, combined with petty crime, Islamist propaganda on the Internet and at the end, the attack." It is an attack that also upset Tunisians, according to the website G Net. "The news gives you goose bumps. The shock is collective, there is general anger. The name of a Tunisian has been added to the list of those who spread fear through international terror. Helpless and powerless, we can only vehemently condemn thos who sully our reputation in front of the entire world." Threat of polarization The Arabic-language newspaper "Al-Araby Al-Jadeed" writes that the attack could have other consequences. "It feeds the fear of Europeans that their countries are no longer safe from terrorism, which is increasingly threatening them. The series of attacks with dozens left dead could undermine the sense of security. That leaves governments with the difficult task of striking an appropriate balance between peace and freedom." And this, in turn, poses another danger, the paper says. "The first beneficiaries of these events, which promote the polarization of European societies, are the far-right and nationalist parties and the slander campaigns against Muslims. All indicators point to the fact that right-leaning parties will be sitting in European parliaments after the coming elections." But it hasn't come to that yet, "Asharq al-Awsat" assures its readers. "The incident and its aftermath won't, however, destroy the spirit of this vital, unsentimental, vastly tolerant and wildly mischievous city. Berlin will mourn, as it often has, and it will move on as it has always done." 22,000 potential jihadists The Spanish paper "El Pais" believes that Angela Merkel probably sees things this way too. She, too, is aware how seductive populist slogans can sound. "But she also knows that they do not deal with the root of the problem. So she confronts them with the force of moral conviction, no matter how unpopular it may be. By doing so, she will turn into the only political leader worthy of the title." At the same time, European states face great challenges, writes the Spanish newspaper "El Mundo." This is especially applies to putting the appropriate security measures in place, it says. "But we must not forget that absolute security is impossible. The roughly 22,000 potential jihadists  - according to estimates made by security services in Europe - show us the scale of the danger we face."


Sakharov award goes to Arab Spring activists Europe is honoring the people whose struggles sparked the Arab Spring revolution. Five of them received this year's prestigious Sakharov Award. It's awarded annually by the European Parliament. The European Parliament was unanimous in its decision. Five people who played a key role in the revolutions witnessed in the Arab world are being honored for propagating freedom of expression. The award comes along with 50,000 euros ($65,000). Jerzy Buzek, president of the European Parliament, said the prize showed the admiration for those who had brought change to Europe's neighborhood. Tunisian trigger The revolution had its beginnings in Tunisia. In December 2010, 26-year-old Mohamed Bouazizi, a vegetable trader, was physically abused by police who had raided his stand and taken away his goods. He doused himself in petrol, went in front of the city hall and set himself on fire screaming, "enough of this poverty, enough of this joblessness!" Two weeks later he succumbed to his injuries. His act of self-immolation drove hundreds of thousands of Tunisians to the streets in protest. From there the whole Arab world faced an unprecedented wave of protests. The European Parliament awarded Bouazizi this year's Sakharov prize posthumously. Protests in Cairo's Tahrir square Cairo was next: On Jan.18, 2011 a young lady used a webcam to voice her displeasure with Egypt's ruling elite. She told her viewers, "I say no to corruption, I say no to this regime." Asmaa Mahfouz was only 26-years old when she uploaded the video to her Facebook account, urging people to come to Tahrir square to demand their rights. Thousands and thousands heeded her call to ask for freedom. Their grievances: social justice, basic liberties, democratic reforms. Today, Mahfouz has 14,000 friends on Facebook. The EU Parliament is also honoring Libyan dissident Ahmed al-Zubair Ahmed al-Sanusi. The 77-year old was Libya's most senior political prisoner, spending 31 years in prison under the Gadhafi regime. Much of his term was spent in solitary confinement. After 42 years of dictatorship, al-Sanusi is back again in Libya's politics courtesy of the governing rebels who ousted the government. Pencil protests In Syria, things have been different for the two activists named the other winners of this year's prize. Lawyer Razan Zaitouneh has been living in hiding for months. Her blog "Syrian Human Rights Information Link," has been reporting about the systematic abuse of human rights by the Syrian authorities. She has called for the transfer of President Bashar al-Assad to the International Criminal Court. The Syrian cartoonist Ali Farzat is in a similar position. As the protests gained momentum, his drawings became more direct. Even al-Assad himself was not spared by the artist's pencil. But that would be thoroughly punished. Foreign media showed pictures of a heavily battered and badly injured Farzat in hospital. The reason: a cartoon impression of President al-Assad as a hitchhiker, standing by the roadside with a bag in his hand and signalling with his thumb to Moammar Gadhafi to take him along. Just like Ali Farzat, other Arab Spring activists have had to sacrifice a great deal. Asmaa Mahfouz lost a friend during the protests. "I am not the only one who has earned this award," she told Deutsche Welle. The prize honors her as a brave woman. "But there other Egyptians more courageous than me," she added. "They too deserve to be commemorated, I am proud to be one of them and to live in this country." Author: Stefanie Duckstein / cm Editor: Daniel Pelz


'Enough!' movement aims to bring change to Ethiopia The revolutions and protests across the Arab World have yet to to take hold in Africa. The opposition in Ethiopia wants to change that and is calling for mass anti-government demonstrations. In Ethiopia, May 28 is known as Victory Day - the day in 1991 when Meles Zenawi's rebel troops triumphantly entered Addis Ababa to take power from military dictator Mengistu. But 20 years after the revolution, the onetime rebel leader continues to cling to power - and now he is worried about facing an uprising of his own. 

Beka movement 
For months now, opposition groups have been organizing a protest movement against Meles, called "Beka!" - a word that means "Enough!" in Amharic. Many Ethiopians, it seems, have had "enough" of Meles' leadership - they are complaining about the soaring costs of living, rising joblessness among youth, and increasing harassment from the Meles government. 
"It is time at last to end 20 years of ongoing suffering under the dictatorial regime," said Demelash Likun, the head of the Ethiopian youth organization in Germany. His group is one of those responsible for organizing the planned Beka protests on May 28. 
Demelash says now is a good time to take political action, since there is more focus on African politics now than ever before. "We can't forget that, thanks to the Egyptian and Tunisian people, everyone has seen that it's still possible to aim for democracy in Africa, simply following the will of the people," he said. 

 

Jasmin revolution in Amharish 

 
Many Ethiopians agree with Demelash, including Ethiopians that live in the US and Europe. The Beka campaign and protests began outside of Ethiopia in mid-January, 2011, via social media, right after the Jasmine Revolution pushed Tunesian ex-President Ben Ali out of his country. Since then, the opposition and civic groups, including youth groups in the US and Europe, have been holding demonstrations. 
This raises the question of whether the demonstrations have any effect on the local population. According to Lulit Mesfin, the international coordinator of the Beka movement, the answer is "yes." 
Lulit Mesfin doesn't want to say too much about the actions that the Beka movement is planning; if the government finds out about it, it would stop them, she said. 
"People would be arrested, killed and tortured," Lulit said. Five years ago, she notes, some 200 opposition members were killed by security forces during the parliamentary elections. A majority of the leadership of the largest opposition party was thrown into prison for nearly two years. 

Meles regime - business as usual 
This time, too, the government reacted with a wave of arrests, most of which affected the Oromo ethnic group. The Oromo are Ethiopia's largest ethnic group and they are unhappy about being politically marginalized. But they only represent the tip of a mass-protest iceberg. 
Meles Zenawi has also arrested Oromo members of his own ruling coalition - a fact that shows how nervous he is, observers say. The opposition is also reporting that Internet cafes are being monitored, on the "three agents per cafe" principal. The aim: to put the brakes on any possible Facebook-mobilized campaigns and avert a Tunisia- or Egypt-style revolt. 
Ethiopia expert Ulrich Delius said he, too, is aware that the Ethiopian government is taking a harder line. Delius, who works for the German rights group Society for Threatened Peoples (GfbV), says that up to now 370 politicians have been arrested, whereabouts unknown. 
"We've also seen constant saber-rattling between Ethiopia and Eritrea. Meles Zenawi threatened to significantly raise defense spending," Delius said. "That leads to increasing tensions in the region - and that is really very worrisome." 

Eritrean trump card? 
Once again Meles Zenawi is playing the Eritrean trump card. In a move thought to be mostly aimed at diverting attention from his political woes, Zenawi has recently made announcements about Eritreans being found on the border with explosives and weapons. Moreover, Zenawi says, Eritrea is trying to turn Addis Ababa into a second Baghdad, with its frequent bombing attacks. 
The plan is to shift the focus of peoples' anger onto Eritrea may just fail this time, despite the fact that there are plenty of enraged citizens in Ethiopia, the second-most populous country in Africa. Because the security forces, whose leadership is mostly recruited from Meles' Tigray ethic group, are on the one hand still clearly behind the political leadership. 
On the other hand, Ethiopia's democracy movement, unlike in Egypt or in Libya, cannot count on the full support of the international community, observers say. In the West, Ethiopia's regime is well-liked and appreciated - especially as a bulwark against Islamic terrorists from Somalia. And so far African Union, which has its headquarters in Addis Ababa, has not openly called for more democracy in Ethiopia; Libya was a different question altogether. 
Autor: Mohammed Negash (jen)
Editor: Rob Mudge Beka movement 
For months now, opposition groups have been organizing a protest movement against Meles, called "Beka!" - a word that means "Enough!" in Amharic. Many Ethiopians, it seems, have had "enough" of Meles' leadership - they are complaining about the soaring costs of living, rising joblessness among youth, and increasing harassment from the Meles government. 
"It is time at last to end 20 years of ongoing suffering under the dictatorial regime," said Demelash Likun, the head of the Ethiopian youth organization in Germany. His group is one of those responsible for organizing the planned Beka protests on May 28. 
Demelash says now is a good time to take political action, since there is more focus on African politics now than ever before. "We can't forget that, thanks to the Egyptian and Tunisian people, everyone has seen that it's still possible to aim for democracy in Africa, simply following the will of the people," he said. 

 

Jasmin revolution in Amharish 

 
Many Ethiopians agree with Demelash, including Ethiopians that live in the US and Europe. The Beka campaign and protests began outside of Ethiopia in mid-January, 2011, via social media, right after the Jasmine Revolution pushed Tunesian ex-President Ben Ali out of his country. Since then, the opposition and civic groups, including youth groups in the US and Europe, have been holding demonstrations. 
This raises the question of whether the demonstrations have any effect on the local population. According to Lulit Mesfin, the international coordinator of the Beka movement, the answer is "yes." 
Lulit Mesfin doesn't want to say too much about the actions that the Beka movement is planning; if the government finds out about it, it would stop them, she said. 
"People would be arrested, killed and tortured," Lulit said. Five years ago, she notes, some 200 opposition members were killed by security forces during the parliamentary elections. A majority of the leadership of the largest opposition party was thrown into prison for nearly two years. 

Meles regime - business as usual 
This time, too, the government reacted with a wave of arrests, most of which affected the Oromo ethnic group. The Oromo are Ethiopia's largest ethnic group and they are unhappy about being politically marginalized. But they only represent the tip of a mass-protest iceberg. 
Meles Zenawi has also arrested Oromo members of his own ruling coalition - a fact that shows how nervous he is, observers say. The opposition is also reporting that Internet cafes are being monitored, on the "three agents per cafe" principal. The aim: to put the brakes on any possible Facebook-mobilized campaigns and avert a Tunisia- or Egypt-style revolt. 
Ethiopia expert Ulrich Delius said he, too, is aware that the Ethiopian government is taking a harder line. Delius, who works for the German rights group Society for Threatened Peoples (GfbV), says that up to now 370 politicians have been arrested, whereabouts unknown. 
"We've also seen constant saber-rattling between Ethiopia and Eritrea. Meles Zenawi threatened to significantly raise defense spending," Delius said. "That leads to increasing tensions in the region - and that is really very worrisome." 

Eritrean trump card? 
Once again Meles Zenawi is playing the Eritrean trump card. In a move thought to be mostly aimed at diverting attention from his political woes, Zenawi has recently made announcements about Eritreans being found on the border with explosives and weapons. Moreover, Zenawi says, Eritrea is trying to turn Addis Ababa into a second Baghdad, with its frequent bombing attacks. 
The plan is to shift the focus of peoples' anger onto Eritrea may just fail this time, despite the fact that there are plenty of enraged citizens in Ethiopia, the second-most populous country in Africa. Because the security forces, whose leadership is mostly recruited from Meles' Tigray ethic group, are on the one hand still clearly behind the political leadership. 
On the other hand, Ethiopia's democracy movement, unlike in Egypt or in Libya, cannot count on the full support of the international community, observers say. In the West, Ethiopia's regime is well-liked and appreciated - especially as a bulwark against Islamic terrorists from Somalia. And so far African Union, which has its headquarters in Addis Ababa, has not openly called for more democracy in Ethiopia; Libya was a different question altogether. 
Autor: Mohammed Negash (jen)
Editor: Rob Mudge For months now, opposition groups have been organizing a protest movement against Meles, called "Beka!" - a word that means "Enough!" in Amharic. Many Ethiopians, it seems, have had "enough" of Meles' leadership - they are complaining about the soaring costs of living, rising joblessness among youth, and increasing harassment from the Meles government. 
"It is time at last to end 20 years of ongoing suffering under the dictatorial regime," said Demelash Likun, the head of the Ethiopian youth organization in Germany. His group is one of those responsible for organizing the planned Beka protests on May 28. 
Demelash says now is a good time to take political action, since there is more focus on African politics now than ever before. "We can't forget that, thanks to the Egyptian and Tunisian people, everyone has seen that it's still possible to aim for democracy in Africa, simply following the will of the people," he said. 

 

Jasmin revolution in Amharish 

 
Many Ethiopians agree with Demelash, including Ethiopians that live in the US and Europe. The Beka campaign and protests began outside of Ethiopia in mid-January, 2011, via social media, right after the Jasmine Revolution pushed Tunesian ex-President Ben Ali out of his country. Since then, the opposition and civic groups, including youth groups in the US and Europe, have been holding demonstrations. 
This raises the question of whether the demonstrations have any effect on the local population. According to Lulit Mesfin, the international coordinator of the Beka movement, the answer is "yes." 
Lulit Mesfin doesn't want to say too much about the actions that the Beka movement is planning; if the government finds out about it, it would stop them, she said. 
"People would be arrested, killed and tortured," Lulit said. Five years ago, she notes, some 200 opposition members were killed by security forces during the parliamentary elections. A majority of the leadership of the largest opposition party was thrown into prison for nearly two years. 

Meles regime - business as usual 
This time, too, the government reacted with a wave of arrests, most of which affected the Oromo ethnic group. The Oromo are Ethiopia's largest ethnic group and they are unhappy about being politically marginalized. But they only represent the tip of a mass-protest iceberg. 
Meles Zenawi has also arrested Oromo members of his own ruling coalition - a fact that shows how nervous he is, observers say. The opposition is also reporting that Internet cafes are being monitored, on the "three agents per cafe" principal. The aim: to put the brakes on any possible Facebook-mobilized campaigns and avert a Tunisia- or Egypt-style revolt. 
Ethiopia expert Ulrich Delius said he, too, is aware that the Ethiopian government is taking a harder line. Delius, who works for the German rights group Society for Threatened Peoples (GfbV), says that up to now 370 politicians have been arrested, whereabouts unknown. 
"We've also seen constant saber-rattling between Ethiopia and Eritrea. Meles Zenawi threatened to significantly raise defense spending," Delius said. "That leads to increasing tensions in the region - and that is really very worrisome." 

Eritrean trump card? 
Once again Meles Zenawi is playing the Eritrean trump card. In a move thought to be mostly aimed at diverting attention from his political woes, Zenawi has recently made announcements about Eritreans being found on the border with explosives and weapons. Moreover, Zenawi says, Eritrea is trying to turn Addis Ababa into a second Baghdad, with its frequent bombing attacks. 
The plan is to shift the focus of peoples' anger onto Eritrea may just fail this time, despite the fact that there are plenty of enraged citizens in Ethiopia, the second-most populous country in Africa. Because the security forces, whose leadership is mostly recruited from Meles' Tigray ethic group, are on the one hand still clearly behind the political leadership. 
On the other hand, Ethiopia's democracy movement, unlike in Egypt or in Libya, cannot count on the full support of the international community, observers say. In the West, Ethiopia's regime is well-liked and appreciated - especially as a bulwark against Islamic terrorists from Somalia. And so far African Union, which has its headquarters in Addis Ababa, has not openly called for more democracy in Ethiopia; Libya was a different question altogether. 
Autor: Mohammed Negash (jen)
Editor: Rob Mudge "It is time at last to end 20 years of ongoing suffering under the dictatorial regime," said Demelash Likun, the head of the Ethiopian youth organization in Germany. His group is one of those responsible for organizing the planned Beka protests on May 28. 
Demelash says now is a good time to take political action, since there is more focus on African politics now than ever before. "We can't forget that, thanks to the Egyptian and Tunisian people, everyone has seen that it's still possible to aim for democracy in Africa, simply following the will of the people," he said. 

 

Jasmin revolution in Amharish 

 
Many Ethiopians agree with Demelash, including Ethiopians that live in the US and Europe. The Beka campaign and protests began outside of Ethiopia in mid-January, 2011, via social media, right after the Jasmine Revolution pushed Tunesian ex-President Ben Ali out of his country. Since then, the opposition and civic groups, including youth groups in the US and Europe, have been holding demonstrations. 
This raises the question of whether the demonstrations have any effect on the local population. According to Lulit Mesfin, the international coordinator of the Beka movement, the answer is "yes." 
Lulit Mesfin doesn't want to say too much about the actions that the Beka movement is planning; if the government finds out about it, it would stop them, she said. 
"People would be arrested, killed and tortured," Lulit said. Five years ago, she notes, some 200 opposition members were killed by security forces during the parliamentary elections. A majority of the leadership of the largest opposition party was thrown into prison for nearly two years. 

Meles regime - business as usual 
This time, too, the government reacted with a wave of arrests, most of which affected the Oromo ethnic group. The Oromo are Ethiopia's largest ethnic group and they are unhappy about being politically marginalized. But they only represent the tip of a mass-protest iceberg. 
Meles Zenawi has also arrested Oromo members of his own ruling coalition - a fact that shows how nervous he is, observers say. The opposition is also reporting that Internet cafes are being monitored, on the "three agents per cafe" principal. The aim: to put the brakes on any possible Facebook-mobilized campaigns and avert a Tunisia- or Egypt-style revolt. 
Ethiopia expert Ulrich Delius said he, too, is aware that the Ethiopian government is taking a harder line. Delius, who works for the German rights group Society for Threatened Peoples (GfbV), says that up to now 370 politicians have been arrested, whereabouts unknown. 
"We've also seen constant saber-rattling between Ethiopia and Eritrea. Meles Zenawi threatened to significantly raise defense spending," Delius said. "That leads to increasing tensions in the region - and that is really very worrisome." 

Eritrean trump card? 
Once again Meles Zenawi is playing the Eritrean trump card. In a move thought to be mostly aimed at diverting attention from his political woes, Zenawi has recently made announcements about Eritreans being found on the border with explosives and weapons. Moreover, Zenawi says, Eritrea is trying to turn Addis Ababa into a second Baghdad, with its frequent bombing attacks. 
The plan is to shift the focus of peoples' anger onto Eritrea may just fail this time, despite the fact that there are plenty of enraged citizens in Ethiopia, the second-most populous country in Africa. Because the security forces, whose leadership is mostly recruited from Meles' Tigray ethic group, are on the one hand still clearly behind the political leadership. 
On the other hand, Ethiopia's democracy movement, unlike in Egypt or in Libya, cannot count on the full support of the international community, observers say. In the West, Ethiopia's regime is well-liked and appreciated - especially as a bulwark against Islamic terrorists from Somalia. And so far African Union, which has its headquarters in Addis Ababa, has not openly called for more democracy in Ethiopia; Libya was a different question altogether. 
Autor: Mohammed Negash (jen)
Editor: Rob Mudge Demelash says now is a good time to take political action, since there is more focus on African politics now than ever before. "We can't forget that, thanks to the Egyptian and Tunisian people, everyone has seen that it's still possible to aim for democracy in Africa, simply following the will of the people," he said. 

 

Jasmin revolution in Amharish 

 
Many Ethiopians agree with Demelash, including Ethiopians that live in the US and Europe. The Beka campaign and protests began outside of Ethiopia in mid-January, 2011, via social media, right after the Jasmine Revolution pushed Tunesian ex-President Ben Ali out of his country. Since then, the opposition and civic groups, including youth groups in the US and Europe, have been holding demonstrations. 
This raises the question of whether the demonstrations have any effect on the local population. According to Lulit Mesfin, the international coordinator of the Beka movement, the answer is "yes." 
Lulit Mesfin doesn't want to say too much about the actions that the Beka movement is planning; if the government finds out about it, it would stop them, she said. 
"People would be arrested, killed and tortured," Lulit said. Five years ago, she notes, some 200 opposition members were killed by security forces during the parliamentary elections. A majority of the leadership of the largest opposition party was thrown into prison for nearly two years. 

Meles regime - business as usual 
This time, too, the government reacted with a wave of arrests, most of which affected the Oromo ethnic group. The Oromo are Ethiopia's largest ethnic group and they are unhappy about being politically marginalized. But they only represent the tip of a mass-protest iceberg. 
Meles Zenawi has also arrested Oromo members of his own ruling coalition - a fact that shows how nervous he is, observers say. The opposition is also reporting that Internet cafes are being monitored, on the "three agents per cafe" principal. The aim: to put the brakes on any possible Facebook-mobilized campaigns and avert a Tunisia- or Egypt-style revolt. 
Ethiopia expert Ulrich Delius said he, too, is aware that the Ethiopian government is taking a harder line. Delius, who works for the German rights group Society for Threatened Peoples (GfbV), says that up to now 370 politicians have been arrested, whereabouts unknown. 
"We've also seen constant saber-rattling between Ethiopia and Eritrea. Meles Zenawi threatened to significantly raise defense spending," Delius said. "That leads to increasing tensions in the region - and that is really very worrisome." 

Eritrean trump card? 
Once again Meles Zenawi is playing the Eritrean trump card. In a move thought to be mostly aimed at diverting attention from his political woes, Zenawi has recently made announcements about Eritreans being found on the border with explosives and weapons. Moreover, Zenawi says, Eritrea is trying to turn Addis Ababa into a second Baghdad, with its frequent bombing attacks. 
The plan is to shift the focus of peoples' anger onto Eritrea may just fail this time, despite the fact that there are plenty of enraged citizens in Ethiopia, the second-most populous country in Africa. Because the security forces, whose leadership is mostly recruited from Meles' Tigray ethic group, are on the one hand still clearly behind the political leadership. 
On the other hand, Ethiopia's democracy movement, unlike in Egypt or in Libya, cannot count on the full support of the international community, observers say. In the West, Ethiopia's regime is well-liked and appreciated - especially as a bulwark against Islamic terrorists from Somalia. And so far African Union, which has its headquarters in Addis Ababa, has not openly called for more democracy in Ethiopia; Libya was a different question altogether. 
Autor: Mohammed Negash (jen)
Editor: Rob Mudge Jasmin revolution in Amharish 

 
Many Ethiopians agree with Demelash, including Ethiopians that live in the US and Europe. The Beka campaign and protests began outside of Ethiopia in mid-January, 2011, via social media, right after the Jasmine Revolution pushed Tunesian ex-President Ben Ali out of his country. Since then, the opposition and civic groups, including youth groups in the US and Europe, have been holding demonstrations. 
This raises the question of whether the demonstrations have any effect on the local population. According to Lulit Mesfin, the international coordinator of the Beka movement, the answer is "yes." 
Lulit Mesfin doesn't want to say too much about the actions that the Beka movement is planning; if the government finds out about it, it would stop them, she said. 
"People would be arrested, killed and tortured," Lulit said. Five years ago, she notes, some 200 opposition members were killed by security forces during the parliamentary elections. A majority of the leadership of the largest opposition party was thrown into prison for nearly two years. 

Meles regime - business as usual 
This time, too, the government reacted with a wave of arrests, most of which affected the Oromo ethnic group. The Oromo are Ethiopia's largest ethnic group and they are unhappy about being politically marginalized. But they only represent the tip of a mass-protest iceberg. 
Meles Zenawi has also arrested Oromo members of his own ruling coalition - a fact that shows how nervous he is, observers say. The opposition is also reporting that Internet cafes are being monitored, on the "three agents per cafe" principal. The aim: to put the brakes on any possible Facebook-mobilized campaigns and avert a Tunisia- or Egypt-style revolt. 
Ethiopia expert Ulrich Delius said he, too, is aware that the Ethiopian government is taking a harder line. Delius, who works for the German rights group Society for Threatened Peoples (GfbV), says that up to now 370 politicians have been arrested, whereabouts unknown. 
"We've also seen constant saber-rattling between Ethiopia and Eritrea. Meles Zenawi threatened to significantly raise defense spending," Delius said. "That leads to increasing tensions in the region - and that is really very worrisome." 

Eritrean trump card? 
Once again Meles Zenawi is playing the Eritrean trump card. In a move thought to be mostly aimed at diverting attention from his political woes, Zenawi has recently made announcements about Eritreans being found on the border with explosives and weapons. Moreover, Zenawi says, Eritrea is trying to turn Addis Ababa into a second Baghdad, with its frequent bombing attacks. 
The plan is to shift the focus of peoples' anger onto Eritrea may just fail this time, despite the fact that there are plenty of enraged citizens in Ethiopia, the second-most populous country in Africa. Because the security forces, whose leadership is mostly recruited from Meles' Tigray ethic group, are on the one hand still clearly behind the political leadership. 
On the other hand, Ethiopia's democracy movement, unlike in Egypt or in Libya, cannot count on the full support of the international community, observers say. In the West, Ethiopia's regime is well-liked and appreciated - especially as a bulwark against Islamic terrorists from Somalia. And so far African Union, which has its headquarters in Addis Ababa, has not openly called for more democracy in Ethiopia; Libya was a different question altogether. 
Autor: Mohammed Negash (jen)
Editor: Rob Mudge Jasmin revolution in Amharish 

 
Many Ethiopians agree with Demelash, including Ethiopians that live in the US and Europe. The Beka campaign and protests began outside of Ethiopia in mid-January, 2011, via social media, right after the Jasmine Revolution pushed Tunesian ex-President Ben Ali out of his country. Since then, the opposition and civic groups, including youth groups in the US and Europe, have been holding demonstrations. 
This raises the question of whether the demonstrations have any effect on the local population. According to Lulit Mesfin, the international coordinator of the Beka movement, the answer is "yes." 
Lulit Mesfin doesn't want to say too much about the actions that the Beka movement is planning; if the government finds out about it, it would stop them, she said. 
"People would be arrested, killed and tortured," Lulit said. Five years ago, she notes, some 200 opposition members were killed by security forces during the parliamentary elections. A majority of the leadership of the largest opposition party was thrown into prison for nearly two years. 

Meles regime - business as usual 
This time, too, the government reacted with a wave of arrests, most of which affected the Oromo ethnic group. The Oromo are Ethiopia's largest ethnic group and they are unhappy about being politically marginalized. But they only represent the tip of a mass-protest iceberg. 
Meles Zenawi has also arrested Oromo members of his own ruling coalition - a fact that shows how nervous he is, observers say. The opposition is also reporting that Internet cafes are being monitored, on the "three agents per cafe" principal. The aim: to put the brakes on any possible Facebook-mobilized campaigns and avert a Tunisia- or Egypt-style revolt. 
Ethiopia expert Ulrich Delius said he, too, is aware that the Ethiopian government is taking a harder line. Delius, who works for the German rights group Society for Threatened Peoples (GfbV), says that up to now 370 politicians have been arrested, whereabouts unknown. 
"We've also seen constant saber-rattling between Ethiopia and Eritrea. Meles Zenawi threatened to significantly raise defense spending," Delius said. "That leads to increasing tensions in the region - and that is really very worrisome." 

Eritrean trump card? 
Once again Meles Zenawi is playing the Eritrean trump card. In a move thought to be mostly aimed at diverting attention from his political woes, Zenawi has recently made announcements about Eritreans being found on the border with explosives and weapons. Moreover, Zenawi says, Eritrea is trying to turn Addis Ababa into a second Baghdad, with its frequent bombing attacks. 
The plan is to shift the focus of peoples' anger onto Eritrea may just fail this time, despite the fact that there are plenty of enraged citizens in Ethiopia, the second-most populous country in Africa. Because the security forces, whose leadership is mostly recruited from Meles' Tigray ethic group, are on the one hand still clearly behind the political leadership. 
On the other hand, Ethiopia's democracy movement, unlike in Egypt or in Libya, cannot count on the full support of the international community, observers say. In the West, Ethiopia's regime is well-liked and appreciated - especially as a bulwark against Islamic terrorists from Somalia. And so far African Union, which has its headquarters in Addis Ababa, has not openly called for more democracy in Ethiopia; Libya was a different question altogether. 
Autor: Mohammed Negash (jen)
Editor: Rob Mudge Many Ethiopians agree with Demelash, including Ethiopians that live in the US and Europe. The Beka campaign and protests began outside of Ethiopia in mid-January, 2011, via social media, right after the Jasmine Revolution pushed Tunesian ex-President Ben Ali out of his country. Since then, the opposition and civic groups, including youth groups in the US and Europe, have been holding demonstrations. 
This raises the question of whether the demonstrations have any effect on the local population. According to Lulit Mesfin, the international coordinator of the Beka movement, the answer is "yes." 
Lulit Mesfin doesn't want to say too much about the actions that the Beka movement is planning; if the government finds out about it, it would stop them, she said. 
"People would be arrested, killed and tortured," Lulit said. Five years ago, she notes, some 200 opposition members were killed by security forces during the parliamentary elections. A majority of the leadership of the largest opposition party was thrown into prison for nearly two years. 

Meles regime - business as usual 
This time, too, the government reacted with a wave of arrests, most of which affected the Oromo ethnic group. The Oromo are Ethiopia's largest ethnic group and they are unhappy about being politically marginalized. But they only represent the tip of a mass-protest iceberg. 
Meles Zenawi has also arrested Oromo members of his own ruling coalition - a fact that shows how nervous he is, observers say. The opposition is also reporting that Internet cafes are being monitored, on the "three agents per cafe" principal. The aim: to put the brakes on any possible Facebook-mobilized campaigns and avert a Tunisia- or Egypt-style revolt. 
Ethiopia expert Ulrich Delius said he, too, is aware that the Ethiopian government is taking a harder line. Delius, who works for the German rights group Society for Threatened Peoples (GfbV), says that up to now 370 politicians have been arrested, whereabouts unknown. 
"We've also seen constant saber-rattling between Ethiopia and Eritrea. Meles Zenawi threatened to significantly raise defense spending," Delius said. "That leads to increasing tensions in the region - and that is really very worrisome." 

Eritrean trump card? 
Once again Meles Zenawi is playing the Eritrean trump card. In a move thought to be mostly aimed at diverting attention from his political woes, Zenawi has recently made announcements about Eritreans being found on the border with explosives and weapons. Moreover, Zenawi says, Eritrea is trying to turn Addis Ababa into a second Baghdad, with its frequent bombing attacks. 
The plan is to shift the focus of peoples' anger onto Eritrea may just fail this time, despite the fact that there are plenty of enraged citizens in Ethiopia, the second-most populous country in Africa. Because the security forces, whose leadership is mostly recruited from Meles' Tigray ethic group, are on the one hand still clearly behind the political leadership. 
On the other hand, Ethiopia's democracy movement, unlike in Egypt or in Libya, cannot count on the full support of the international community, observers say. In the West, Ethiopia's regime is well-liked and appreciated - especially as a bulwark against Islamic terrorists from Somalia. And so far African Union, which has its headquarters in Addis Ababa, has not openly called for more democracy in Ethiopia; Libya was a different question altogether. 
Autor: Mohammed Negash (jen)
Editor: Rob Mudge Many Ethiopians agree with Demelash, including Ethiopians that live in the US and Europe. The Beka campaign and protests began outside of Ethiopia in mid-January, 2011, via social media, right after the Jasmine Revolution pushed Tunesian ex-President Ben Ali out of his country. Since then, the opposition and civic groups, including youth groups in the US and Europe, have been holding demonstrations. 
This raises the question of whether the demonstrations have any effect on the local population. According to Lulit Mesfin, the international coordinator of the Beka movement, the answer is "yes." 
Lulit Mesfin doesn't want to say too much about the actions that the Beka movement is planning; if the government finds out about it, it would stop them, she said. 
"People would be arrested, killed and tortured," Lulit said. Five years ago, she notes, some 200 opposition members were killed by security forces during the parliamentary elections. A majority of the leadership of the largest opposition party was thrown into prison for nearly two years. 

Meles regime - business as usual 
This time, too, the government reacted with a wave of arrests, most of which affected the Oromo ethnic group. The Oromo are Ethiopia's largest ethnic group and they are unhappy about being politically marginalized. But they only represent the tip of a mass-protest iceberg. 
Meles Zenawi has also arrested Oromo members of his own ruling coalition - a fact that shows how nervous he is, observers say. The opposition is also reporting that Internet cafes are being monitored, on the "three agents per cafe" principal. The aim: to put the brakes on any possible Facebook-mobilized campaigns and avert a Tunisia- or Egypt-style revolt. 
Ethiopia expert Ulrich Delius said he, too, is aware that the Ethiopian government is taking a harder line. Delius, who works for the German rights group Society for Threatened Peoples (GfbV), says that up to now 370 politicians have been arrested, whereabouts unknown. 
"We've also seen constant saber-rattling between Ethiopia and Eritrea. Meles Zenawi threatened to significantly raise defense spending," Delius said. "That leads to increasing tensions in the region - and that is really very worrisome." 

Eritrean trump card? 
Once again Meles Zenawi is playing the Eritrean trump card. In a move thought to be mostly aimed at diverting attention from his political woes, Zenawi has recently made announcements about Eritreans being found on the border with explosives and weapons. Moreover, Zenawi says, Eritrea is trying to turn Addis Ababa into a second Baghdad, with its frequent bombing attacks. 
The plan is to shift the focus of peoples' anger onto Eritrea may just fail this time, despite the fact that there are plenty of enraged citizens in Ethiopia, the second-most populous country in Africa. Because the security forces, whose leadership is mostly recruited from Meles' Tigray ethic group, are on the one hand still clearly behind the political leadership. 
On the other hand, Ethiopia's democracy movement, unlike in Egypt or in Libya, cannot count on the full support of the international community, observers say. In the West, Ethiopia's regime is well-liked and appreciated - especially as a bulwark against Islamic terrorists from Somalia. And so far African Union, which has its headquarters in Addis Ababa, has not openly called for more democracy in Ethiopia; Libya was a different question altogether. 
Autor: Mohammed Negash (jen)
Editor: Rob Mudge This raises the question of whether the demonstrations have any effect on the local population. According to Lulit Mesfin, the international coordinator of the Beka movement, the answer is "yes." 
Lulit Mesfin doesn't want to say too much about the actions that the Beka movement is planning; if the government finds out about it, it would stop them, she said. 
"People would be arrested, killed and tortured," Lulit said. Five years ago, she notes, some 200 opposition members were killed by security forces during the parliamentary elections. A majority of the leadership of the largest opposition party was thrown into prison for nearly two years. 

Meles regime - business as usual 
This time, too, the government reacted with a wave of arrests, most of which affected the Oromo ethnic group. The Oromo are Ethiopia's largest ethnic group and they are unhappy about being politically marginalized. But they only represent the tip of a mass-protest iceberg. 
Meles Zenawi has also arrested Oromo members of his own ruling coalition - a fact that shows how nervous he is, observers say. The opposition is also reporting that Internet cafes are being monitored, on the "three agents per cafe" principal. The aim: to put the brakes on any possible Facebook-mobilized campaigns and avert a Tunisia- or Egypt-style revolt. 
Ethiopia expert Ulrich Delius said he, too, is aware that the Ethiopian government is taking a harder line. Delius, who works for the German rights group Society for Threatened Peoples (GfbV), says that up to now 370 politicians have been arrested, whereabouts unknown. 
"We've also seen constant saber-rattling between Ethiopia and Eritrea. Meles Zenawi threatened to significantly raise defense spending," Delius said. "That leads to increasing tensions in the region - and that is really very worrisome." 

Eritrean trump card? 
Once again Meles Zenawi is playing the Eritrean trump card. In a move thought to be mostly aimed at diverting attention from his political woes, Zenawi has recently made announcements about Eritreans being found on the border with explosives and weapons. Moreover, Zenawi says, Eritrea is trying to turn Addis Ababa into a second Baghdad, with its frequent bombing attacks. 
The plan is to shift the focus of peoples' anger onto Eritrea may just fail this time, despite the fact that there are plenty of enraged citizens in Ethiopia, the second-most populous country in Africa. Because the security forces, whose leadership is mostly recruited from Meles' Tigray ethic group, are on the one hand still clearly behind the political leadership. 
On the other hand, Ethiopia's democracy movement, unlike in Egypt or in Libya, cannot count on the full support of the international community, observers say. In the West, Ethiopia's regime is well-liked and appreciated - especially as a bulwark against Islamic terrorists from Somalia. And so far African Union, which has its headquarters in Addis Ababa, has not openly called for more democracy in Ethiopia; Libya was a different question altogether. 
Autor: Mohammed Negash (jen)
Editor: Rob Mudge Lulit Mesfin doesn't want to say too much about the actions that the Beka movement is planning; if the government finds out about it, it would stop them, she said. 
"People would be arrested, killed and tortured," Lulit said. Five years ago, she notes, some 200 opposition members were killed by security forces during the parliamentary elections. A majority of the leadership of the largest opposition party was thrown into prison for nearly two years. 

Meles regime - business as usual 
This time, too, the government reacted with a wave of arrests, most of which affected the Oromo ethnic group. The Oromo are Ethiopia's largest ethnic group and they are unhappy about being politically marginalized. But they only represent the tip of a mass-protest iceberg. 
Meles Zenawi has also arrested Oromo members of his own ruling coalition - a fact that shows how nervous he is, observers say. The opposition is also reporting that Internet cafes are being monitored, on the "three agents per cafe" principal. The aim: to put the brakes on any possible Facebook-mobilized campaigns and avert a Tunisia- or Egypt-style revolt. 
Ethiopia expert Ulrich Delius said he, too, is aware that the Ethiopian government is taking a harder line. Delius, who works for the German rights group Society for Threatened Peoples (GfbV), says that up to now 370 politicians have been arrested, whereabouts unknown. 
"We've also seen constant saber-rattling between Ethiopia and Eritrea. Meles Zenawi threatened to significantly raise defense spending," Delius said. "That leads to increasing tensions in the region - and that is really very worrisome." 

Eritrean trump card? 
Once again Meles Zenawi is playing the Eritrean trump card. In a move thought to be mostly aimed at diverting attention from his political woes, Zenawi has recently made announcements about Eritreans being found on the border with explosives and weapons. Moreover, Zenawi says, Eritrea is trying to turn Addis Ababa into a second Baghdad, with its frequent bombing attacks. 
The plan is to shift the focus of peoples' anger onto Eritrea may just fail this time, despite the fact that there are plenty of enraged citizens in Ethiopia, the second-most populous country in Africa. Because the security forces, whose leadership is mostly recruited from Meles' Tigray ethic group, are on the one hand still clearly behind the political leadership. 
On the other hand, Ethiopia's democracy movement, unlike in Egypt or in Libya, cannot count on the full support of the international community, observers say. In the West, Ethiopia's regime is well-liked and appreciated - especially as a bulwark against Islamic terrorists from Somalia. And so far African Union, which has its headquarters in Addis Ababa, has not openly called for more democracy in Ethiopia; Libya was a different question altogether. 
Autor: Mohammed Negash (jen)
Editor: Rob Mudge "People would be arrested, killed and tortured," Lulit said. Five years ago, she notes, some 200 opposition members were killed by security forces during the parliamentary elections. A majority of the leadership of the largest opposition party was thrown into prison for nearly two years. 

Meles regime - business as usual 
This time, too, the government reacted with a wave of arrests, most of which affected the Oromo ethnic group. The Oromo are Ethiopia's largest ethnic group and they are unhappy about being politically marginalized. But they only represent the tip of a mass-protest iceberg. 
Meles Zenawi has also arrested Oromo members of his own ruling coalition - a fact that shows how nervous he is, observers say. The opposition is also reporting that Internet cafes are being monitored, on the "three agents per cafe" principal. The aim: to put the brakes on any possible Facebook-mobilized campaigns and avert a Tunisia- or Egypt-style revolt. 
Ethiopia expert Ulrich Delius said he, too, is aware that the Ethiopian government is taking a harder line. Delius, who works for the German rights group Society for Threatened Peoples (GfbV), says that up to now 370 politicians have been arrested, whereabouts unknown. 
"We've also seen constant saber-rattling between Ethiopia and Eritrea. Meles Zenawi threatened to significantly raise defense spending," Delius said. "That leads to increasing tensions in the region - and that is really very worrisome." 

Eritrean trump card? 
Once again Meles Zenawi is playing the Eritrean trump card. In a move thought to be mostly aimed at diverting attention from his political woes, Zenawi has recently made announcements about Eritreans being found on the border with explosives and weapons. Moreover, Zenawi says, Eritrea is trying to turn Addis Ababa into a second Baghdad, with its frequent bombing attacks. 
The plan is to shift the focus of peoples' anger onto Eritrea may just fail this time, despite the fact that there are plenty of enraged citizens in Ethiopia, the second-most populous country in Africa. Because the security forces, whose leadership is mostly recruited from Meles' Tigray ethic group, are on the one hand still clearly behind the political leadership. 
On the other hand, Ethiopia's democracy movement, unlike in Egypt or in Libya, cannot count on the full support of the international community, observers say. In the West, Ethiopia's regime is well-liked and appreciated - especially as a bulwark against Islamic terrorists from Somalia. And so far African Union, which has its headquarters in Addis Ababa, has not openly called for more democracy in Ethiopia; Libya was a different question altogether. 
Autor: Mohammed Negash (jen)
Editor: Rob Mudge Meles regime - business as usual 
This time, too, the government reacted with a wave of arrests, most of which affected the Oromo ethnic group. The Oromo are Ethiopia's largest ethnic group and they are unhappy about being politically marginalized. But they only represent the tip of a mass-protest iceberg. 
Meles Zenawi has also arrested Oromo members of his own ruling coalition - a fact that shows how nervous he is, observers say. The opposition is also reporting that Internet cafes are being monitored, on the "three agents per cafe" principal. The aim: to put the brakes on any possible Facebook-mobilized campaigns and avert a Tunisia- or Egypt-style revolt. 
Ethiopia expert Ulrich Delius said he, too, is aware that the Ethiopian government is taking a harder line. Delius, who works for the German rights group Society for Threatened Peoples (GfbV), says that up to now 370 politicians have been arrested, whereabouts unknown. 
"We've also seen constant saber-rattling between Ethiopia and Eritrea. Meles Zenawi threatened to significantly raise defense spending," Delius said. "That leads to increasing tensions in the region - and that is really very worrisome." 

Eritrean trump card? 
Once again Meles Zenawi is playing the Eritrean trump card. In a move thought to be mostly aimed at diverting attention from his political woes, Zenawi has recently made announcements about Eritreans being found on the border with explosives and weapons. Moreover, Zenawi says, Eritrea is trying to turn Addis Ababa into a second Baghdad, with its frequent bombing attacks. 
The plan is to shift the focus of peoples' anger onto Eritrea may just fail this time, despite the fact that there are plenty of enraged citizens in Ethiopia, the second-most populous country in Africa. Because the security forces, whose leadership is mostly recruited from Meles' Tigray ethic group, are on the one hand still clearly behind the political leadership. 
On the other hand, Ethiopia's democracy movement, unlike in Egypt or in Libya, cannot count on the full support of the international community, observers say. In the West, Ethiopia's regime is well-liked and appreciated - especially as a bulwark against Islamic terrorists from Somalia. And so far African Union, which has its headquarters in Addis Ababa, has not openly called for more democracy in Ethiopia; Libya was a different question altogether. 
Autor: Mohammed Negash (jen)
Editor: Rob Mudge This time, too, the government reacted with a wave of arrests, most of which affected the Oromo ethnic group. The Oromo are Ethiopia's largest ethnic group and they are unhappy about being politically marginalized. But they only represent the tip of a mass-protest iceberg. 
Meles Zenawi has also arrested Oromo members of his own ruling coalition - a fact that shows how nervous he is, observers say. The opposition is also reporting that Internet cafes are being monitored, on the "three agents per cafe" principal. The aim: to put the brakes on any possible Facebook-mobilized campaigns and avert a Tunisia- or Egypt-style revolt. 
Ethiopia expert Ulrich Delius said he, too, is aware that the Ethiopian government is taking a harder line. Delius, who works for the German rights group Society for Threatened Peoples (GfbV), says that up to now 370 politicians have been arrested, whereabouts unknown. 
"We've also seen constant saber-rattling between Ethiopia and Eritrea. Meles Zenawi threatened to significantly raise defense spending," Delius said. "That leads to increasing tensions in the region - and that is really very worrisome." 

Eritrean trump card? 
Once again Meles Zenawi is playing the Eritrean trump card. In a move thought to be mostly aimed at diverting attention from his political woes, Zenawi has recently made announcements about Eritreans being found on the border with explosives and weapons. Moreover, Zenawi says, Eritrea is trying to turn Addis Ababa into a second Baghdad, with its frequent bombing attacks. 
The plan is to shift the focus of peoples' anger onto Eritrea may just fail this time, despite the fact that there are plenty of enraged citizens in Ethiopia, the second-most populous country in Africa. Because the security forces, whose leadership is mostly recruited from Meles' Tigray ethic group, are on the one hand still clearly behind the political leadership. 
On the other hand, Ethiopia's democracy movement, unlike in Egypt or in Libya, cannot count on the full support of the international community, observers say. In the West, Ethiopia's regime is well-liked and appreciated - especially as a bulwark against Islamic terrorists from Somalia. And so far African Union, which has its headquarters in Addis Ababa, has not openly called for more democracy in Ethiopia; Libya was a different question altogether. 
Autor: Mohammed Negash (jen)
Editor: Rob Mudge Meles Zenawi has also arrested Oromo members of his own ruling coalition - a fact that shows how nervous he is, observers say. The opposition is also reporting that Internet cafes are being monitored, on the "three agents per cafe" principal. The aim: to put the brakes on any possible Facebook-mobilized campaigns and avert a Tunisia- or Egypt-style revolt. 
Ethiopia expert Ulrich Delius said he, too, is aware that the Ethiopian government is taking a harder line. Delius, who works for the German rights group Society for Threatened Peoples (GfbV), says that up to now 370 politicians have been arrested, whereabouts unknown. 
"We've also seen constant saber-rattling between Ethiopia and Eritrea. Meles Zenawi threatened to significantly raise defense spending," Delius said. "That leads to increasing tensions in the region - and that is really very worrisome." 

Eritrean trump card? 
Once again Meles Zenawi is playing the Eritrean trump card. In a move thought to be mostly aimed at diverting attention from his political woes, Zenawi has recently made announcements about Eritreans being found on the border with explosives and weapons. Moreover, Zenawi says, Eritrea is trying to turn Addis Ababa into a second Baghdad, with its frequent bombing attacks. 
The plan is to shift the focus of peoples' anger onto Eritrea may just fail this time, despite the fact that there are plenty of enraged citizens in Ethiopia, the second-most populous country in Africa. Because the security forces, whose leadership is mostly recruited from Meles' Tigray ethic group, are on the one hand still clearly behind the political leadership. 
On the other hand, Ethiopia's democracy movement, unlike in Egypt or in Libya, cannot count on the full support of the international community, observers say. In the West, Ethiopia's regime is well-liked and appreciated - especially as a bulwark against Islamic terrorists from Somalia. And so far African Union, which has its headquarters in Addis Ababa, has not openly called for more democracy in Ethiopia; Libya was a different question altogether. 
Autor: Mohammed Negash (jen)
Editor: Rob Mudge Ethiopia expert Ulrich Delius said he, too, is aware that the Ethiopian government is taking a harder line. Delius, who works for the German rights group Society for Threatened Peoples (GfbV), says that up to now 370 politicians have been arrested, whereabouts unknown. 
"We've also seen constant saber-rattling between Ethiopia and Eritrea. Meles Zenawi threatened to significantly raise defense spending," Delius said. "That leads to increasing tensions in the region - and that is really very worrisome." 

Eritrean trump card? 
Once again Meles Zenawi is playing the Eritrean trump card. In a move thought to be mostly aimed at diverting attention from his political woes, Zenawi has recently made announcements about Eritreans being found on the border with explosives and weapons. Moreover, Zenawi says, Eritrea is trying to turn Addis Ababa into a second Baghdad, with its frequent bombing attacks. 
The plan is to shift the focus of peoples' anger onto Eritrea may just fail this time, despite the fact that there are plenty of enraged citizens in Ethiopia, the second-most populous country in Africa. Because the security forces, whose leadership is mostly recruited from Meles' Tigray ethic group, are on the one hand still clearly behind the political leadership. 
On the other hand, Ethiopia's democracy movement, unlike in Egypt or in Libya, cannot count on the full support of the international community, observers say. In the West, Ethiopia's regime is well-liked and appreciated - especially as a bulwark against Islamic terrorists from Somalia. And so far African Union, which has its headquarters in Addis Ababa, has not openly called for more democracy in Ethiopia; Libya was a different question altogether. 
Autor: Mohammed Negash (jen)
Editor: Rob Mudge "We've also seen constant saber-rattling between Ethiopia and Eritrea. Meles Zenawi threatened to significantly raise defense spending," Delius said. "That leads to increasing tensions in the region - and that is really very worrisome." 

Eritrean trump card? 
Once again Meles Zenawi is playing the Eritrean trump card. In a move thought to be mostly aimed at diverting attention from his political woes, Zenawi has recently made announcements about Eritreans being found on the border with explosives and weapons. Moreover, Zenawi says, Eritrea is trying to turn Addis Ababa into a second Baghdad, with its frequent bombing attacks. 
The plan is to shift the focus of peoples' anger onto Eritrea may just fail this time, despite the fact that there are plenty of enraged citizens in Ethiopia, the second-most populous country in Africa. Because the security forces, whose leadership is mostly recruited from Meles' Tigray ethic group, are on the one hand still clearly behind the political leadership. 
On the other hand, Ethiopia's democracy movement, unlike in Egypt or in Libya, cannot count on the full support of the international community, observers say. In the West, Ethiopia's regime is well-liked and appreciated - especially as a bulwark against Islamic terrorists from Somalia. And so far African Union, which has its headquarters in Addis Ababa, has not openly called for more democracy in Ethiopia; Libya was a different question altogether. 
Autor: Mohammed Negash (jen)
Editor: Rob Mudge Eritrean trump card? 
Once again Meles Zenawi is playing the Eritrean trump card. In a move thought to be mostly aimed at diverting attention from his political woes, Zenawi has recently made announcements about Eritreans being found on the border with explosives and weapons. Moreover, Zenawi says, Eritrea is trying to turn Addis Ababa into a second Baghdad, with its frequent bombing attacks. 
The plan is to shift the focus of peoples' anger onto Eritrea may just fail this time, despite the fact that there are plenty of enraged citizens in Ethiopia, the second-most populous country in Africa. Because the security forces, whose leadership is mostly recruited from Meles' Tigray ethic group, are on the one hand still clearly behind the political leadership. 
On the other hand, Ethiopia's democracy movement, unlike in Egypt or in Libya, cannot count on the full support of the international community, observers say. In the West, Ethiopia's regime is well-liked and appreciated - especially as a bulwark against Islamic terrorists from Somalia. And so far African Union, which has its headquarters in Addis Ababa, has not openly called for more democracy in Ethiopia; Libya was a different question altogether. 
Autor: Mohammed Negash (jen)
Editor: Rob Mudge Once again Meles Zenawi is playing the Eritrean trump card. In a move thought to be mostly aimed at diverting attention from his political woes, Zenawi has recently made announcements about Eritreans being found on the border with explosives and weapons. Moreover, Zenawi says, Eritrea is trying to turn Addis Ababa into a second Baghdad, with its frequent bombing attacks. 
The plan is to shift the focus of peoples' anger onto Eritrea may just fail this time, despite the fact that there are plenty of enraged citizens in Ethiopia, the second-most populous country in Africa. Because the security forces, whose leadership is mostly recruited from Meles' Tigray ethic group, are on the one hand still clearly behind the political leadership. 
On the other hand, Ethiopia's democracy movement, unlike in Egypt or in Libya, cannot count on the full support of the international community, observers say. In the West, Ethiopia's regime is well-liked and appreciated - especially as a bulwark against Islamic terrorists from Somalia. And so far African Union, which has its headquarters in Addis Ababa, has not openly called for more democracy in Ethiopia; Libya was a different question altogether. 
Autor: Mohammed Negash (jen)
Editor: Rob Mudge The plan is to shift the focus of peoples' anger onto Eritrea may just fail this time, despite the fact that there are plenty of enraged citizens in Ethiopia, the second-most populous country in Africa. Because the security forces, whose leadership is mostly recruited from Meles' Tigray ethic group, are on the one hand still clearly behind the political leadership. 
On the other hand, Ethiopia's democracy movement, unlike in Egypt or in Libya, cannot count on the full support of the international community, observers say. In the West, Ethiopia's regime is well-liked and appreciated - especially as a bulwark against Islamic terrorists from Somalia. And so far African Union, which has its headquarters in Addis Ababa, has not openly called for more democracy in Ethiopia; Libya was a different question altogether. 
Autor: Mohammed Negash (jen)
Editor: Rob Mudge On the other hand, Ethiopia's democracy movement, unlike in Egypt or in Libya, cannot count on the full support of the international community, observers say. In the West, Ethiopia's regime is well-liked and appreciated - especially as a bulwark against Islamic terrorists from Somalia. And so far African Union, which has its headquarters in Addis Ababa, has not openly called for more democracy in Ethiopia; Libya was a different question altogether. 
Autor: Mohammed Negash (jen)
Editor: Rob Mudge Autor: Mohammed Negash (jen)
Editor: Rob Mudge


Clashes between suspected militants in Libyan city of Benghazi More than a dozen people have been killed in a bout of violence in the eastern Libyan city. The incident comes a day after a US air strike killed dozens of people in the country. Medical officials said on Saturday that clashes between government forces and militant fighters in Benghazi claimed the lives of at least 14 people. It is currently unclear as to which group the militants belong to, but forces loyal to the internationally recognized government have been battling Islamist extremists for several months. A military spokesman told Reuters news agency most of the fighting had been in the neighborhood of Boatni. Threat of terrorism The incident comes a day after US forces launched an air strike on a suspected militant camp in the western part of the country. It was later reported that two of the victims were Serbian nationals who had been abducted in November. Two governments - one based in the capital of Tripoli, the other in the east of the country - have been vying for power since the 2011 revolution led to the overthrow of dictator Muammar Gaddafi. Meanwhile, officials have expressed concern over the return of Tunisians who had left to train with Islamist groups in countries like Syria and Iraq. Some 3,000 Tunisians have travelled abroad to join forces with those groups, including IS. Permalink http://p.dw.com/p/1Hyto blc/bw (Reuters, AFP)


Protests break out in Algeria, Yemen as Egypt celebrates new dawn While Egyptians celebrate a political revolution, clashes have taken place in Algiers and Sanaa as protesters push for regime changes of their own. Police put an end to rallies in both cities. Scuffles broke out as Algerian security forces in riot gear arrested demonstrators on Saturday, with some reports that police attacked marchers with clubs. Pro-democracy protesters gathered in Algiers, attempting to stage a banned march inspired by events in Egypt, which led to the resignation of Egyptian leader Hosni Mubarak. About 30,000 security personnel were deployed, with officers surrounding protesters in a cordon to prevent the rally from taking place. Organizers said several thousand protesters had turned out. "I am sorry to say the government has deployed a huge force to prevent a peaceful march. This is not good for Algeria's image," said Mustafa Bouchachi, a leader of the League for Human Rights group, which has helped organize the march. Thousand of officers were stationed in the center of the Algerian capital, Algiers, in readiness for the protest. Protests on Saturday called for Bouteflika to leave office Some 200 people, including opposition politicians, were arrested in Algiers, according to the League for Human Rights' Khelifi Abdelmouman, who said several other protesters had been arrested in other cities. On a visit to neighboring Tunisia, German Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle said he was concerned by events in Algeria and called on authorities there to "renounce all forms of violence" against protesters. "We are betting that reason will prevail," he said from the Tunisian capital, Tunis. Mubarak's resignation on Friday had prompted spontaneous evening demonstrations by Algeria's opposition Rally for Culture and Democracy (RCD) party, which were quashed by police. A robust police presence was in place in Algiers ahead of the Saturday protest, conducted largely by middle-class men. Armored vehicles were deployed at several road junctions around the city, with the main contingent of officers based in May 1 Square, the planned starting point for the rally. "We are ready for the demonstration," Mohsen Belabes, spokesman for the RCD, said ahead of the rally. "It's going to be a great day for democracy." The party's leader, Said Sadi, told the German news agency dpa earlier this week that violence would be inevitable if people were barred from peacefully protesting. Meanwhile, Algeria's biggest opposition party, the Socialist Forces Front (FFS), chose not to participate in Saturday's demonstration. Party leader Karim Tabou told Radio France Internationale that while he supported the quest for greater freedom, the task was complex because of Algeria's history. "Algeria needs more work, more serious [efforts] than simple popular agitation," he said. Call for new freedoms, jobs A group of about 20 protesters reached the square ahead of the starting time, calling for an end to the rule of President Abdelaziz Bouteflika, who has enforced 19 years of a state of emergency in the country.  Saadi said police had ringed to city to stifle demonstrations  Demonstrators want more democratic freedom, a change of government and action to tackle unemployment. In the demonstrations on Friday, police charged on demonstrators and 10 people were arrested, according to RCD leader Saadi. He said several protesters needed medical treatment, adding that authorities had surrounded the capital to prevent people from joining the march. "Trains have been stopped and other public transport will be as well," he said. Since January, four Algerians have died of self-immolation, and at least a dozen have set themselves on fire so far this year. They are thought to have been inspired by a similar act in neighboring Tunisia, which was a catalyst for the fall of that country’s government. Wave of unrest across region Following the departure of the Egyptian president and the overthrow of Tunisian President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali last month, the Algerian regime is one of several in the Middle East and North Africa facing popular protests.  In Bahrain, money is being handed out ahead of protests  Some 300 demonstrators also took the streets of Yemen’s capital, Sanaa, on Saturday. The number of participants swelled into the thousands as they marched toward the Egyptian embassy. "The people want the fall of the government," protesters chanted. "A Yemeni revolution after the Egyptian revolution." But a group of government supporters armed with knives and sticks confronted the protesters at the central Tahrir Square, and the opposition protesters were forced to flee after scuffles broke out. Yemen's ruling party set up tents in Tahrir Square last week to occupy the space, and party officials handed out small amounts of money to reward pro-government protesters on Saturday. Yemeni officials said on Saturday they respected the Egyptian people's choice and would support them in their search for progress and development. Egyptian clean up The Egyptian military began on Saturday morning to remove barricades around Cairo's Tahrir Square, the epicenter of the revolt against Mubarak's 30-year autocratic rule. Senior military officials, to whom Mubarak handed power, said they would respect the will of the people but have yet to present solid plans for a transition. Author: Richard Connor, David Levitz (AFP, dpa, Reuters) Editor: Sean Sinico


Mohsen Marzouk: "Democracy is a weapon against terrorism" In an interview with DW, Mohsen Marzouk, general secretary of Tunisia's governing secular Nidaa Tounes party, talked about the multifaceted challenges his country is facing: terror, radicalization, and corruption. Tunisian politician Marzouk described this year's attacks by Islamic State (IS) terrorists in Tunisia as acts of war. Marzouk said fighting terrorism was a top priority: "We need multinational cooperation on the issues of intelligence and information sharing. The world needs this, not only Tunisia." He admitted that Tunisian security forces weren't adequately trained for the fight against terror. According to Marzouk, the radicalization of young Tunisians was a consequence of the Arab Spring: "During these years of democratization, everything was opened up and so any person could come in and recruit people." Confronted with human rights violations committed by members of the Tunisian police, Marzouk admitted they still occur despite government efforts to introduce reforms. He replied: "Do you think that you can have a new police after revolution in two or three years? (...) It's not easy to move from a totalitarian regime, which lasted for 100 years, to a new paradise." Marzouk defended the arrest of blogger Yassine Ayari in December 2014, who had criticized the military: "The people who have been arrested were not criticizing the Ministry of Defense; they were making an apology of terrorism. (…) If we are fighting terrorism, the people who are encouraging terrorism or making an apology of terrorism have to be stopped. That's part of the whole war against terrorism." He said that corruption was another huge problem in Tunisia and that terror groups were closely linked to mafia lobbies: "The link between smugglers and terrorists is clear, on the frontiers and on the border zones." The government of Béji Caïd Essebsi was struggling to solve the problems, Marzouk told DW: "The state institutions are weak because we are building new institutions." The Tunisian government didn't believe in "less liberties and more security because of terrorism," Marzouk said. "We think that democracy and freedom is an army, is a weapon against terrorism." Mohsen Marzouk was born in 1965. He studied political sociology and international relations in Tunis. As a human rights activist, he was imprisoned under the former regime. Marzouk was a founding member of Nidaa Tounes, which won the parliamentary elections in October 2014. He is now the party's general secretary. The full interview will air on DW's "Conflict Zone" on Wednesday, December 2, at 17.30 UTC, and will be available online on demand.


Tunisia's disillusioned youth Right now, not many people are taking to the streets in Tunisia, but the protest movement is gaining momentum. Discontent has arisen from the economic depression but also, current political culture. Was it an accident or suicide? The circumstances surrounding Ridha Yahyoui's death have still not been confirmed. The young man climbed atop a power pole near the governor's office in the town of Kasserine in eastern Tunisia. When he reached the top, he was electrocuted. Yahyaoui was protesting because his name was removed from a list of applicants for public sector jobs. On Tuesday, another young man did the same thing and ended up dying the same way. Accident or suicide? The question matters, for suicide would be a highly symbolic political gesture: it is reminiscent of the suicide committed by Mohammed Bouazzizi, who set himself on fire in December 2010 to protest the arbitrariness of public administration. Back then, it was fire and now it's high voltage. A suicide would send the clear message that things have not changed much in the past five years in Tunisia, despite the suicides and all the people who have taken to the streets. The two deaths are also characterized by their geographical location: Kasserine is not too far from Sidi Bouzid, where Mohammed Bouazzizi ended his life. Today, five years on, the message is that the region is still suffering from the same problems. 'No vision, no plans' In fact, many young Tunisians feel deprived of a future. The unemployment rate is high: on average it is 15 percent. In the economically undeveloped regions in the interior of Tunisia, it is almost twice as high. Permalink http://p.dw.com/p/1Hi0N That is not the only reason the government deserves to be criticized, says Moncef Slimi, a Maghreb expert at Deutsche Welle. "The government has responded to strikes with a certain arrogance. First, it declared a state of emergency in Kasserine and then acted as though it were a security issue." The problem was, in fact, much more serious. The demonstrators were addressing a greater problem. "Young Tunisians played a key role in the revolution five years ago. Nevertheless, they feel they are politically and economically marginalized even more today." Crowds of demonstrators marched through the streets of the capital Tunis Protests are growing This impression is even more dramatic, as it is not limited to Tunisia's interior regions. General protests, reveals the Tunisian newspaper "La Presse", have spread across the country. It describes sit-ins and peaceful protest marches in several Tunisian cities. The first protests, although very small ones, have been seen in the capital of Tunis. Meanwhile, government spokesman Khaled Chouket has announced a series of social measures for the Kasserine region. The government has pledged to create around 5,000 new jobs and provide around 60 million euros for the construction of 1,000 subsidized apartments. Many Tunisians do not understand why this has taken so long. "Politicians are mostly selfish," says Moncef Slimi. Many representatives of the people are primarily concerned about their own interests and are mired in personal rivalries and power struggles. The protests have mainly served as a wake-up call. Slimi says, "The state must prove that there is a political will now. Young Tunisians are waiting for a sign like that." Protesters blocked a road in Kasserine as police fired tear gas The risk of radicalization A growing number of signs indicate that people will soon run out of patience. Wael Naouar, Secretary General of the Tunisian General Students Association, is already exerting pressure. According to him, Prime Minister Habib Essid only has two options, and explains, "Either he quickly finds a solution to the problem of unemployment, or he gives up power." For the time being, the demonstrators' political slogans are moderate. They are committed to the rule of law and democracy. That may change, warns the newspaper "La Presse." Jihadists in the Tunisian backcountry may consider exploiting the protests for their own purposes. "The destitution and the remoteness of disconnected regions is their preferred terrain. Corruption and smuggling only aggravate the region's woes." Jihadists could try to capitalize on the tensions by mingling with demonstrators and allowing them to escalate the situation. Then, the government may be tempted to take tough action, which in turn, would play into the hands of the jihadists. Dream of an authoritarian state Moncef Slimi agrees that the danger is real. The government has a right to be concerned about the protests and safety in public spaces; however, many people working in the state apparatus still dream that the regime toppled in 2011 will return. "And those people have consciously chosen the security option. They are interested in one thing: they want to curtail the power of democratic institutions as much as possible."


EU foreign policy across Arab world faces upheaval The European Union has long feared popular Islamist revolutions on the Mediterranean, preferring undemocratic stability. But Tunisia's secular uprising has forced Europe to rethink its support for friendly dictators. The French government was embarrassed this week. It was forced to admit that it had backed the wrong horse in Tunisia in the violent upheaval that ended with the removal of President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali. Outrage was focussed on Foreign Minister Michele Alliot-Marie, who publicly offered Ben Ali "the world-renowned know-how of France's security forces" three days before he fled the country. He was subsequently refused refuge in France before being taken in by Saudi Arabia. Alliot-Marie's morally dubious offer outraged not only political opponents, but also members of the French government. French magazine Canard Enchaine quoted Prime Minister Francois Fillon calling his colleague "totally mad," while President Nicolas Sarkozy grumbled, "These are statements that weakened France's position." Ben Ali used to be a friend to France, now he's a pariah Sarkozy has good reason not to be too tough on his foreign minister. On a visit to Tunisia back in 2008, he was full of praise for his host. Europe was led to believe that Ben Ali was a changed man: "Nowadays freedom is expanding in Tunisia," the diplomatic president said. After all, "How could I visit a country as a friend and then appoint myself as an advisor?" Alliot-Marie defended her misguided offer afterwards: "Let's be honest: We were all - politicians, diplomats and researchers, journalists - surprised by the Jasmine Revolution (Tunisia's uprising - ed.)," she said. Surprise and confusion This is certainly true, and Thomas Klau, head of the Paris office of the European Council on Foreign Relations (ECFR), is inclined to forgive the foreign minister's statement as a poorly-timed faux pas. "She's new to the office, and it was seen by many in Paris as an indication that she hasn't quite mastered all the skills of a foreign minister," he told Deutsche Welle. In fact, Klau points out that Alliot-Marie's offer merely embodied the position of the Sarkozy government before the revolution. Not just France, but the whole of the EU and the US: "I think the unspoken consensus in the EU was that it was better in the Arab world to have an authoritarian regime than a potentially unstable democracy." Other foreign ministers were more skilled at adapting to the rapidly changing situation in Tunisia than their French counterpart, leaving Alliot-Marie out in the cold as the only one who revealed Europe's anti-democratic bias in Arab states. Ben Judah, policy fellow in London's ECFR office, told Deutsche Welle, "We had this belief that supporting moderate, anti-Islamist regimes with trade was actually a guarantor of stability. I think that's been shown to be absent. What a regime needs to be truly stable is legitimacy, which Ben Ali didn't have." The problem with democracy is that it is messy and difficult to control. "We've seen the difficulties that the electoral success of Hezbollah has raised for western politics in the Middle East," says Klau. "It's easy to call for free elections, but if these elections deliver a government that is actively hostile to legitimate European interests like security, then that creates a serious problem." The new Central America? Some pundits have compared the EU's policy in the Arab states to that of the US's much-maligned foreign policy in Central America in the 1970s and 1980s, where democratic movements were suppressed in favor of stable, anti-communist dictators. The EU's fear of Islamist risings in countries like Tunisia, Libya and Egypt led it to ignore human rights records and sustain bloody and corrupt regimes.  Europe needs to rethink its ideas about what causes instability in the Arab world  But the fall of Ben Ali has changed the game. "This confronts the EU with a new situation," says Klau. "They will have to develop a new set of answers, because clearly the old line isn't good enough anymore." It is the secular nature of the Tunisian revolution that has taken the EU by surprise. "We expected revolutions in some of these countries, but when it happened, it wasn't a revolution led by Islamists," says Judah. "It was led by young, secular, educated men who wanted visas and better job opportunities. We weren't correctly identifying what were the sources of instability, and what parts of society were disgruntled." For all of Tunisia's status as a package holiday resort for Europeans and its economic growth, the wealth was clearly not reaching the well-educated population. People were desperate for food. "What has toppled this regime is actually the rise in commodity prices," says Judah. "Commodity prices are soaring right now - the price of bread, oil, coffee and so on. This is actually a far greater danger to the regime's survival than Islamism. We need to work out a policy that looks at the link between instability and commodity prices." Dominos like in Eastern Europe? But though there are similar situations in Egypt and Libya, the fear that keeps other Middle Eastern dictators awake at night is not so likely to come about. "Politics in the Arab world is local," says Klau. "Political and economic conditions are very different from one country to the other, so I would be surprised if we saw the kind of domino effect we saw in Central and Eastern Europe as a result of the collapse of Soviet control." "But on the other hand, Tunisia will certainly serve as an inspiration for others in the region. It won't be so much a domino effect, but a potential trend that might materialize in some countries and not in others." Author: Ben Knight Editor: Rob Mudge


Mohsen Marzouk: Is Tunisia's democracy failing? Mohsen Marzouk is one of the most powerful politicians in Tunisia and a human rights activist. But is he doing enough to prevent human rights violations, reform security forces, and combat terrorism in his country? Tunisia has been hit by several massive terrorist attacks this year. In March, "Islamic State" (IS) gunmen took hostages at the Bardo Museum in the heart of the capital of Tunis. In June, a shooter gunned down 38 people, mostly foreign tourists, in the beach resort of Sousse. And just a few weeks ago, a deadly explosion carried out by a suicide bomber in a bus killed several members of the Tunisian presidential guard, leading to the government's declaration of a state of emergency. In an exclusive interview with DW, Tunisian politician Moshen Marzouk said these attacks, for which IS terrorists have claimed responsibility, must be considered war and be the top priority. He also said Tunisia needs international help in the fight against terrorism. Former human rights activst Mohsen Marzouk is currently secretary general of Nidaa Tounes, the ruling party in Tunisia "We need multinational cooperation on the issues of intelligence and information sharing. The world needs this, not only Tunisia," he said. A human rights activist who was imprisoned under the former regime, Marzouk is now general secretary of the governing secular Nidaa Tounes party. He was, in fact, one of the founding members of Nidaa Tounes, which won the most seats in parliamentary elections in October 2014. Marzouk helped get current Tunisian President Beji Caid Essebsi elected at the end of 2014 as his campaign manager and remains a member of the party's Executive Committee. Radicalized youth Tunisia is the biggest source of foreign fighters joining the "Islamic State." More than 3,000 young Tunisians have joined ranks of the IS. That's as many radicalized people from Tunisia as from all of Europe. Marzouk says the newly found freedoms in Tunisia after the Arab Spring in 2011 partially explain the extent of radicalization in his country. "During these years of democratization, everything was opened up and so any person could come in and recruit people," he told DW. Plus, the Islamist party Ennahda, which led a transitional government after the revolution, didn't do enough to stop the network of recruiters and to fight radical recruitment, according to Marzouk. Tunisia's mafia linked to terrorism One of the biggest tasks for Tunisia right now is to combat terrorism, Marzouk said in the interview. But what makes this fight difficult is not just the large amount of radicalized young people, but also mafia lobbies inside Tunisia which are linked to terrorism. "The link between smugglers and terrorists is clear, on the frontiers and on the border zones," Marzouk said on DW's Conflict Zone. It takes time, however, to shut the mafia lobbies down, Marzouk added, stressing that Tunisia is in the midst of a democratization process and is still busy with rebuilding the country after the revolution. "The state institutions are weak because we are building new institutions." Tunisian police are trying to master the situation, Marzouk said, but it's an asymmetric war for which Tunisian security forces aren't trained. Human rights abuses in Tunisian prisons And that's not the only problem Tunisian security forces are facing. According to human rights organizations like Human Rights Watch and Amnesty International, Tunisian police are still abusing prisoners: beating them up, torturing and raping them - practices common during the old regime. In the interview with DW, Marzouk admitted that these practices are still occurring today - at least occasionally - but said that the government is trying to fight the problem. He added that it takes time to train police officers to respect human rights and to teach them not to torture, rape and abuse prisoners, as these kinds of methods were accepted for decades. "Do you think that you can have a new police after revolution in two or three years? It’s a long process. (…) It's not easy to move from a totalitarian regime, which lasted for 100 years, to a new paradise." One of the reasons why these practices are still ongoing is that the war against terror Tunisia is currently fighting is weakening state institutions and slowing down the reformation of security forces as well as the battle against mafia lobbies and human rights abuses, Marzoud said. "First we have to conduct this war against terrorism and then we have to reform our security institutions." Corruption still an issue Reforms are also needed when it comes to corruption. In fact, Tunisia has slipped in Transparency International's Corruption Index in the last five years, which, according to the World Bank, is costing the country two percent of its GDP. Confronted with these numbers, Marzouk said fighting corruption should be a priority in Tunisia but has gone backwards because state institutions are weak since the revolution. However, Tunisia's Anti-Corruption Commission says it can't do its job as the civil service is holding it hostage and as they only have a limited budget and less and less employees. Is the government silencing the media? It's not just the national Anti-Corruption Commission whose hands are tied. The government is also increasingly cracking down on journalists. According to the Committee to Protect Journalists, Tunisian security services are harassing and threatening journalists who are critical of them. Tunisians protest in support of blogger Yassine Ayari during his appeal hearing in March 2015 In December 2014, blogger Yassine Ayari, who criticized the military in his blog posts, was convicted of damaging military morale. Marzouk agrees with this decision, saying it was part of the government's war against terror. "The people who have been arrested were not criticizing the Ministry of Defense; they were making an apology of terrorism. And now if you are fighting terrorism you have to be serious. (…) If we are fighting terrorism, the people who are encouraging terrorism or making an apology of terrorism have to be stopped, that's part of the whole war against terrorism." Ayari denied the allegation that he apologized for terrorism, and told DW he was arrested for criticizing the government and to serve as an example to other bloggers critical of the government. Does Tunisia want a dictator back? All of this has caused disillusionment among many Tunisians. According to a poll by the International Republican Institute, 72 percent of the Tunisian population thinks the country is heading in the wrong direction. November 2014 saw Tunisia's first presidential election since the 2011 revolution. A Pew Research Study from October 2014 shows that the number of Tunisians who thought democracy preferable to other systems has dropped to below 50 percent since the early days of the Arab Spring. When asked if they wanted a democratic government or a strong leader to solve Tunisia's problems, only 38 percent of those surveyed chose democracy, while 59 percent would rather have a strong leader. But Marzouk doesn't think this has anything to do with his party's politics. "Some people think liberties explain what is happening in the country, including terrorism and the issue of the lack of security. They are asking for less liberties and more security because of terrorism. But we think that democracy and freedom is an army, is a weapon against terrorism." And Marzouk says Tunisia is not alone with this issue. "The debate about the relationship between fighting terrorism and protecting the rights also happens in France right now and it happened in the United Kingdom and the United States."


Dashed hopes for migrants in Tunisia's desert When the United Nations closed down the Choucha transit camp in Tunisia in 2013, some refused to leave. They are still fighting for refugee status, even though chances are slim. Elizabeth Bryant reports from Choucha. Choucha, or what's left of the former camp run by the United Nations, is now a ghost town. Scraps of wood and blowing garbage are lonely reminders of the now-dismantled camp that once was receiving up to 18,000 people per day. But about 50 men from sub-Saharan Africa refused to leave and stayed put. Kadril Abdou says he fled his native Ghana in 2002 to escape what he claimed was ethnic violence. He slowly made his way northward, spending time in Burkina Faso before settling in Libya as an illegal worker. In 2011, Abdou was on the move again. As Libya's revolution erupted, he joined thousands of refugees crossing the border into southern Tunisia. This tiny North African country serves as a key transit corridor for Europe-bound migrants. He ended up at Choucha refugee camp, a few miles away from Tunisia's border. Abdou (right) is one of the few men who stayed put - they still live at the now defunct camp The men argue they qualify for refugee status. The UN disagrees and some aid workers question the settlers' identities and motives. Failed dreams to reach Europe If nothing else, Choucha captures the broader, frustrated hopes of migrants escaping poverty or unrest who have failed in their dreams to reach Europe and other points west. "There is no place like home, you know," said 37-year-old Abdou, a soft-spoken man whose dreadlocks are tucked under a large black beret. "If you see someone outside fighting for survival, they definitely have a problem." The UN refugee agency UNHCR closed the camp three years ago, turning off water and electricity as Libya's first uprising wound down. Many of the remaining residents agreed to be voluntarily repatriated; a minority qualified as refugees and was resettled in third countries. Back in 2011, the Choucha refugee camp was in full swing - the UN closed the camp in 2013 But Abdou and a few others are still here - they've failed to meet asylum criteria, and are refusing to go home. "So now they're in the position of foreigners on Tunisia's territory," said Nabil Benbekhti, senior protection officer for UNHCR's office in Tunisia. "If they want to be offered any kind of residency or other option in Tunisia, they must ask the government," he added. "But, as far as I know, that's not what these people want." Hard life in Tunisia's desert Some aid workers believe Choucha's residents are economic migrants hoping for a better deal in the West. The men argue their causes are legitimate. As the standoff continues, life in the desert has gotten harder. Tunisia is besieged by economic and security woes; neighboring Libya is battling ongoing unrest, including the growing presence of "Islamic State" (IS) fighters. "All I'm asking is relocation to a safe third country," Abdou said. He fears going home, he adds, because of ethnic conflict - even though Ghana today is hailed as a multiparty democracy. For him, staying in Tunisia, which is still working out an asylum policy, is not an option. "I come from a British colony," Abdou said. "The West, that's my colonial past." In Tunisia, drivers heading down the dusty highway abutting the camp are greeted by rickety signs, demanding asylum in English and Arabic. On occasion, the migrants head to Tunis to protest in front of UN and Tunisian government ministries. "I'm a refugee," Yousuf from Somalia says in his makeshift home and pulls out outdated UN documents "One of their problems is psychological," said Taher Cheniti, secretary general of the Tunisian Red Crescent Society, whose organization has worked with the Choucha residents. "They don't understand why their compatriots, their friends and cousins were accepted for asylum, but they didn't have the same chance. So they continue this sit-in, hoping the position of governments will change." That's unlikely to happen anytime soon. Indeed, sentiments towards refugees and economic migrants are hardening in Europe, fed by the massive influx arriving on European shores over the past two years and the recent wave of attacks in France and Germany. 'They've rejected better and safer housing' "We and our partners have proposed all kinds of solutions for them," Cheniti said, adding that most of the men have refused better and safer housing about an hour's drive away. "They refuse to get their situation regularized in Tunisia because their ambition is different. They're hoping to earn enough money to cross the Libyan border and reach the Italian shores illegally." A few Choucha residents have found work in the nearby town of Ben Guerdane. Many others beg for food and water by the side of the road. "They're tolerated by Tunisian authorities, and they're assisted by NGOs," Cheniti said. "But they have no specific statute." The area around Choucha has become increasingly dangerous, reflecting broader unrest in both Tunisia and Libya. In March, IS militants crossed over the Libyan border to launch an attack on Ben Guerdane, about a half-hour's drive from the camp. Illegal migrants and human traffickers also cross through the area, aid workers say, en route to Libya, a popular, if dangerous crossing point to Europe. But Choucha resident Bright Samson, from Nigeria's Delta state, says the residents are left to fend for themselves. "The security isn't here," he said. "When there is trouble around here, it's left to you and the Creator." Aid workers, however, note the men have refused offers to be relocated to safer housing farther from the border. During a tour of the camp, Samson points to the makeshift dwellings that still respect the camp's original set-up, carved out along geographical lines. In the Somalian sector - a few patched tents - Adam Yousuf steps into his home, past a cot piled with blankets and a single carton of milk. He pulls out outdated UN papers carefully wrapped in plastic. They apparently show his onetime status as a temporary asylum seeker. 'We need a solution' "I'm a refugee," said Yousuf, a tiny, wizened man with big, sad eyes. "We've just been left here. We need a solution." A few migrants have applied for Tunisian working papers, says Anais Elbassil, who heads the Tunisian chapter of French NGO France Terre d'Asile. Months later, there has been no response. "They don't want to return home or to remain in Tunisia," she said. Asked what their options are, she has no answer. "There really aren't very many."


Tunisia declares state of emergency after massacre Tunisia's president has declared a state of emergency a week after an Islamic militant attack on the resort town of Sousse. The country last imposed such a measure during the 2011 uprising that launched the Arab Spring. Tunisian President Beji Caid Essebsi declared a state of emergency on Saturday, a move that will give his government more authority, though it was initially unclear exactly what powers the government would take. "I have decided to declare the state of emergency throughout Tunisia for 30 days," the president said in a televised address. "We are facing a serious danger...we are in a state of war," he said, adding that the country is "not safe" from extremist attacks. The declaration comes one week after a gunman killed 38 foreign tourists at a beach hotel in the northern city of Sousse. It temporarily gives the government more executive flexibility, hands the police and army more authority, and restricts certain rights such as the right to public assembly. The "Islamic State" terrorist group claimed responsibility for the shooting - the second deadly attack on tourists in Tunisia in the past three months. In March, two Tunisians killed at least 20 people in a gun attack on the Bardo museum in the capital, Tunis. Blow to tourism The gunman behind the June 26 Sousse rampage, identified as 23-year-old student Seifeddine Rezgui, was killed by police at the scene. On Thursday, Tunisian authorities announced they had arrested eight people "with direct links" to the attack. Officials also said Rezgui had received training from jihadis in neighboring Libya, and was there at the same time as the two Tunisians behind the Bardo attack. The last time an emergency was declared in Tunisia was during the revolution that ousted longtime President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali in 2011. Those powers remained in place until March 2014. Tunisia has faced a surge in jihadist violence since the ouster, putting the country's budding democracy and tourism industry at risk. More than 3,000 Tunisians have left the North African country to fight with militant groups in Iraq, Syria, and Libya, according to Reuters. nm/sms (Reuters, AP, AFP, dpa)


Tunisia PM urges patience amid crisis Following a wave of increasingly volatile protests over the country's flagging economy, Tunisia's leader has asked for more time. Prime Minister Essid has promised democracy will prevail no matter what. Prime Minister Habib Essid begged for "patience" from the Tunisian people on Saturday after a string of sometimes violent protests against the rampant unemployment plaguing the country. Emerging from a crisis cabinet meeting, Essid promised his administration was taking the issue very seriously, but warned that changes could not be implemented overnight. Tunisia "is in danger despite the positive things which we have accomplished, particularly the transition toward democracy", said Essid, pleading with the public to "understand that there are difficulties." "Solutions exist but some patience and optimism are needed," he added. He declined to mention any concrete plans to tackle joblessness. Worst crisis since the revolution A week of intense protesting touched off in the city of Kasserine on January 16 when a young unemployed man, Ridha Yahyaoui, despairing of his situation climbed a utility pole near the governor's office and electrocuted himself. Across the country, 15 percent of citizens are out of work, the rate is even higher among university graduates at 32 percent. After clashes broke out between police and protestors, which resulted in the death of one policeman in the town of Feriana on Wednesday, the government imposed a nationwide curfew. On Saturday, Essid said the curfew would remain in place for security reasons until further notice. Originally the poster child for success stories arising out of the 2011 "Arab Spring," Tunisia - which was able to swiftly remove dictator Zine El Abidine Ben Ali and transition to democracy - has struggled economically in the aftermath. High-profile terrorist attacks against tourists, whose visits to the country's Mediterranean resorts account for a good deal of the Tunisian economy, have worsened financial woes. es/jlw (AFP, Reuters)


Violence erupts in Tunisia over unemployment At least eight police officers have been injured in conflicts with protestors demanding economic reform in Kasserine. Two days of confrotation boiled over following the suicide of a young unemployed man. At least eight police officers have been injured in conflicts with protesters demanding economic reform in Kasserine. Two days of confrontation boiled over following the suicide of a young unemployed man. Tunisian police and demonstrators clashed late on Wednesday in the city of Kasserine despite a nighttime curfew after two days of unrest. Following the suicide of a young unemployed man, hundreds of job-seeking demonstrators have taken to the streets to demand a solution to the impoverished city's dire circumstances. "Work, freedom, dignity," chanted the crowds, throwing stones and burning tires before trying to storm a police station. Officers then attempted to disperse the crowds with tear gas and a water cannon, but were in part blocked by a row of smoldering tires. Abdelghani Chaabani, the regional health authority, said that eight police were injured in Kasserine and another 11 in nearby Thala, while Reuters news agency reported that at least one officer had been killed in similar clashes in the town of Feriana. President Beji Caid Essebsi said on Wednesday that he understood the plight of "700,000 unemployed and 250,000 of them young people who have degrees." "But... we cannot deal with situations like this by statements or a helping hand. You have to give it time," he said. Reminders of the 'Arab Spring' Tensions reached a fever pitch in Kasserine after 28-year-old unemployed Ridha Yahyaoui killed himself by climbing a utility pole near the governor's office, electrocuting himself. Around 15 percent of Tunisians are unemployed, among them many with university degrees. Rallies have been held all around the country, including in the capital Tunis, in solidarity with Kasserine, which is in one of the poorest areas in the country. The protests have drawn comparisons to the 2011 uprising in the country that touched off the "Arab Spring" around North Africa and the Middle East. Originally thought to be the poster child for a peaceful transition from autocracy in the region, recent terror attacks targeting tourists and an unstable economy has threatened the stability of the Mediterranean nation. The 2011 revolution was also touched off by the suicide of a young man, Mohamed Bouazizi, who self-immolated at provincial police headquarters following brutal treatment at the hands of local officers. es/jil (AFP, Reuters)


Tunisia Islamist party congratulates secular rivals on election win The Islamist-leaning political party Ennahda has conceded defeat in Tunisia's parliamentary elections. The vote has been hailed as transparent and credible by EU election observers. Official election commission results from Sunday's vote were still to come on Tuesday, but exit polls and statistical samples both point towards a win for Nida Tunis (Tunisia Calls), with about 35 percent of the seats in the 217-seat parliament. That would give the party the right to name a prime minister. Its leader, 87-year-old Tunisian political veteran Beji Caid Essebsi, had vowed to form a coalition with other parties. "The Tunisian people have reinforced their commitment to democracy with credible and transparent elections that gave Tunisians of all political tendencies a free vote," Annemie Neyts-Uytterbroeck, head of the European Union's observer mission, told reporters on Tuesday. The election had been held amid tight security aimed to protect against extremist attacks. Sunday marked the country's first parliamentary vote since 2011 when it became the birthplace of the Arab Spring revolution, which has since led to turmoil in neighboring nations. Tunisia has also struggled with security in the revolution's aftermath, though not to the same extent. Rivals concede defeat The moderate Islamist Ennahda (Renaissance) party gained 25 percent of the vote, giving them a substantial voice in any new government. The party, which won polls held in 2011 shortly after the revolution, conceded defeat and congratulated its secular rival, in a stark contrast to the post-election process in neighboring nations. Ennahda's leader Rashed Ghannouchi told his fellow Tunisians to celebrate "democratic freedom", calling his country "the only tree still standing in a devastated forest," in reference to the crises in other Arab Spring countries. "The whole Arab wishes they were Tunisian, so enjoy all these freedoms," he said. se/es (AP, AFP)


Terror and tourism in Tunisia Terrorist attacks and the 2011 uprising have taken their toll on Tunisia’s tourism sector. The country has done its best to protect visitors, but it stands little chance against terrorists acting alone. The increased warning level offered no protection in the end. A total of 28 tourists were killed in Friday's attacks on two hotels near the city of Sousse. A dozen more were injured. Among the victims were German tourists. Germany's Foreign Ministry has set up a crisis team, with a hotline, ++(0)30-5000-3000. Tunisian President Beji Caid Essebsi told the AFP news agency that a "global strategy" is needed in the fight against jihadists. Tunisia, he said, cannot go it alone. A spokesman from travel group TUI told AFP some 3,800 Germans are in the country on TUI bookings. The company said that customers who have booked holidays in Tunisia for the current summer season can rebook or cancel their trips until September 15 free of charge. Friday's attack is likely to hit Tunisia's tourist sector hard Increased security measures There has been a greater focus on security in the region since October 2013, when there was a suicide bombing in Sousse. The bomber blew himself up on a beach, but no one was killed. After the attack on the Bardo museum in March of this year, Tunisian officials once again increased security precautions. But it was clear that these measures could only offer tourists limited protection. Following the 2013 bombing, Tunisian politician and businessman in the tourism sector, Ahmed Smaoui, said that - while tighter controls and precautions were necessary - they were not enough. "The actual solution to the terrorism problem involves ending the political, economic, and social crisis that began in January 2011 (the start of the uprising against former dictator Zine al-Abidine Ben-Ali)," he said. Social background of Jihadism The political crisis has been overcome. But the social and economic problems remain. Unemployment is officially at 15 percent, but among young people, it's much higher. In the urban areas on the coast, the rate is around 24 percent, while in rural areas in the southern part of the country, almost every second person between the ages of 15 and 29 is out of work. Tunisia is also a poor country: The average Tunisian has an income of 8,100 euros a year. Poverty and lack of prospects play into the hands of the jihadi terrorists. "Desperate young men can easily become victims of jihadist propagandists," the activist Noumen Mhamdi, of the Tunisian city of Kasserine, told French newspaper Le Monde earlier this month. The people of Kasserine were particularly vociferous opponents of Ben Ali's regime in 2011. But their bravery brought little economic reward: the town's economy has not gained momentum following the revolution, and some citizens have joined radical Islamist groups. "Islamic State. Enemies of Allah, you will live in fear," reads some graffiti written on the wall of a school, according to the Le Monde reporter. The attack on the Djerba synagogue in 2002 left 19 dead But poverty is not the only factor that supports terrorism. At least some of those arrested in connection with March's attack on the Bardo museum in Tunis came from prosperous backgrounds. Altogether, estimates say, around 3,000 Tunisians are currently fighting for "Islamic State" in Syria and Iraq. Dangers for tourism The destructive energy of the jihadists is a serious danger for Tunisia. Tourism represents 7 percent of the country's GDP - it has created 400,000 jobs and employs roughly 12 percent of the working population. But the vulnerability of the sector was first made clear with the attack on a synagogue on the island of Djerba in April 2002. Nineteen tourists were killed, including 14 Germans, while another 30 were injured. One of the perpetrators was also German - Christian Ganczarski, born in 1966. In February 2009, he was sentenced to 18 years in prison for being an accessory to murder and membership of a terrorist organization. Before the attack, around 300,000 German tourists visited Djerba every year, a figure that dropped dramatically afterwards - in 2003, only 120,000 Germans visited Tunisia. The 2011 revolution also affected tourism - though less than originally feared. In 2014, some six million people visited the country - a decline of 15 percent on 2010. But Friday's attack may well have negated all those efforts.


In Focus Stimulus or stagnation? Will the political reforms produced by the "Arab Spring" protests lead to economic reforms, as well? We take a look at the current situation in Egypt and Tunisia. The news spread almost instantaneously over Facebook, Twitter and text messaging: Mohamed Bouazizi, a young Tunisian vegetable seller, set fire to himself in protest at the confiscation of his goods and constant harassment by officialdom. Many of his fellow citizens also lived in poverty and suffered under the prevailing economic and political misery. This was the event that triggered the Tunisian revolution. But how have Tunisian society and its economy developed since then? Has the toppling of the dictatorship meant a liberation of productive forces? Or are they mired in old habits and inflexible structures?


Three days of mourning begin in France following deadly attack in Nice France has begun three days of mourning following the deadly attack by a truck driver through crowds on the Promenade des Anglais. The state of emergency is to be extended. Three days of mourning have begun as people across France reflect after the nation fell victim to its third major terror attack in the space of only 18 months. Huge crowds had gathered along the Promenade des Anglais in the Mediterranean city of Nice on Thursday evening to watch the Bastille Day fireworks, a traditional way to cap off France's annual celebration of its revolution against absolute monarchy. It was then that Mohamed Lahouaiej Bouhlel, a 31-year-old resident of Nice born in Tunisia used a 19-metric-ton refrigerated truck to plow through the revelers, killing 84 people. Among the dead were 10 children and teenagers, the French government later confirmed. Amongst the victims were two German high school students from Berlin and their teacher. A further 202 victims were wounded, with 52 still in critical condition and 25 in intensive care. After driving 2 kilometers (1.2 miles) through the crowd, Bouhlel was killed after he began shooting and police and the officers returned fire. On Friday morning, eyewitness Richard Gutjahr told DW that in the street near the attack "many of the bodies are still laying out for investigative reasons. It looks like a war scene." In a speech outlining how France would move forward in the wake of the attacks, President Francois Hollande expressed his condolences to the families of the victims and said that France must remain strong "because we have to set an example of cohesion and unity for the world." Hollande pointed out that the victims of the attack were of many nationalities, and that the world should be vigilant as terrorists "hope to strike at the heart of any country that values freedom," though no extremist group has yet claimed responsibility for the attack. As the day went on, details began to emerge about the attacker, though authorities were still investigating whether he acted alone. Paris Prosecutor Francois Molins said that Bouhlel was a divorced father of three, and that his ex-wife had been taken into custody for questioning. Police found an automatic pistol, along with several fake weapons, when they searched the truck Bouhlel was not known to security authorities for any ties to terrorism or radical Islam, though he had been arrested in January following a road rage incident. He was given a 6-month suspended sentence in March because it was a first offense. Tunisian authorities have since told the press that he also had allegations of domestic violence made against him in the past. Solidarity from the around the world The governments of many nations, for example Russia, the US, the UK, Mexico, Germany and Morocco offered their prayers and support for the people of France. French embassies around the world became sites of silent vigils as flowers, cards, and candles were placed outside. "On this Bastille Day, we are reminded of the extraordinary resilience and democratic values that have made France an inspiration to the entire world," said US President Barack Obama, before ordering flags in the capital Washington to be flown at half mast. In a later speech, the president added that following the "tragic and appalling attack on freedom," the world "will not be deterred in its fight against Islamic State." "Solidarity at such times is the most valuable thing we have," said German Chancellor Angela Merkel. Not every foreign message was one of fellowship however. Polish Interior Minister Mariusz Blaszczak, of the ruling right-wing Law and Justice Party (PiS) used the opportunity to blame the "multi-culti policies and political correctness" of the European Union for the spate of terror attacks across the continent in the past year. He then praised his own party for its tough stance on immigration. State of emergency to be extended President Hollande has said that France will extend its state of emergency for a further three months with parliamentary approval. It was due to be repealed on July 26 after having been in effect for eight months following the November 13 attacks in Paris that cost 130 lives. He also said that the country will beef up its security sector that has been left to languish in recent years, and step up vigilance on anyone at risk of carrying out such an attack. On Monday, foreign ministers from across Europe along with US counterpart John Kerry will meet for talks on to combat the rising tide of Islamist extremist violence in Europe.


Why France again? To date, France has suffered seven terrorist attacks in which 140 people have been killed. Political scientist and France expert Ronja Kempin explains why France is so often targeted. DW: Yet another terrorist attack. Why is France repeatedly targeted? Ronja Kempin: There are many reasons that are linked to each other and make France so vulnerable. First of all, France is one of the European countries that are deeply involved in the international war against terror. The French military is active in Syria and Iraq, where it bombs "Islamic State" positions. Secondly, you must not overlook the fact that because of its colonialist past, France has a large Muslim community whose members hold dual citizenship: French and that of their country of origin. It is difficult for French authorities to monitor citizens going through the process of radicalization because they can easily travel in and out of the country with a French passport. They do not need a visa to stay in France if they are Syrian, Tunisian or Algerian; they have citizenship. Then there are reasons that can be found within France itself. France is a secular nation that strictly separates religion from state. The state does not feel responsible for religious matters. That means it hasn't kept an eye on what has been going in Muslim communities, where past radicalization processes have eluded the state because it simply did not feel responsible. There are two more reasons why France has been the target of terror again. The country has a high unemployment rate. Almost 10 percent of the population is unemployed. This is serious when you consider the fact that 46 percent of young people with an immigrant background are affected by unemployment and thus a lack of prospects. In this regard, the potential for radicalization lies within the country. Finally, collaboration between French intelligence agencies is still problematic, as in the past. French intelligence agencies do not cooperate enough with each other. Information gaps constantly emerge, and at the same time, politicians have not found a means of improving cooperation between the different agencies. As we now see, the gaps often lead to fatal consequences for the country and its people. Many other countries actively supporting the front against Islamist terror also have deplorable social conditions at home. Why is it that France is always struck? If you compare the two other countries whose military is heavily involved in the fight against "Islamic State," i.e. Great Britain and the USA, then you notice that France is much easier to access geographically than an island like Great Britain. It is far more difficult to enter the USA than French territory for terrorists who have been radicalized in Northern Africa, the Sahel region, or in Syria and Iraq in the Middle East. Why has this attack just taken place? Can you explain "why now"? Secondly, on the morning of the 14th of July, French President Francois Hollande said in his traditional speech on the national holiday that the situation with regard to terrorism was much better under control. And if the terrorist attack in Nice does turn out to be motivated by Islamism, it would be a clear signal by the Islamist terrorists saying: You won't get us under control. To what extent do you expect tough counteraction on the part of France? Well, the French president has already said that France would toughen sanctions on Iraq and Syria. How much tougher will they be? At this point, I believe you can say the French government cannot handle further military involvement in the region. We shouldn't overlook the fact that since the attacks in November, over 10 thousand soldiers and members of the French army have been deployed in the country, meaning France itself, to fight international terrorism. That weakens France's capacity to act internationally. Ronja Kempin is a senior fellow in the research division of the German Institute for International and Security Affairs, SWP (Stiftung Wissenschaft und Politik) in Berlin. She studied political science in France. The interview was conducted by DW's Wolfgang Dick.


Tunisia's first democratically elected president sworn in After years of authoritarian rule, Tunisia has inaugurated its first freely elected president. Beji Caid Essibsi has long held office in Tunis, but insists his administration will not be a continuation of the past. Beji Caid Essebsi was sworn in as president of Tunisia on Wednesday in a plenary session of parliament, where his secularist Nida Tounes party holds the largest bloc of seats. Essebsi is the first democratically elected head of state in the north African country since it gained independence from France in 1956. The 88-year-old veteran of Tunisian politics won 55.68 percent of the votes cast in a run-off election on December 21. After his swearing-in ceremony was compete, Essebsi was to travel to the presidential palace in Carthage, a suburb of Tunis, for a formal hand over of power from former President Moncef Marouki. Nida Tounes defeated rival moderate Islamist party Ennahda, to which Marzouki belongs. Marzouki received 44.32 percent of the vote, and his party said it had not ruled out joining a coalition government coming second in the October parliamentary vote. A 'president for all Tunisians' Tunisia had only two heads of state between gaing its independence from French colonial rule in 1957 and its revolution nearly four years ago. Habib Bourguiba, a nationalist leader who spearheaded the nation's independence, ruled Tunisia as president for 30 years, before Zine El Abidine Ben Ali, who was overthrown in the Arab spring revolts in 2011 took power. Essebsi served under both, and has been accused by his detractors as being an extension of the Ben Ali regime. Essebsi has denied these accusations, saying he would be a "president for all Tunisians," adding that Tunisia had turned a page on the past and should look to the future. Tunisia is the birthplace of the Arab Spring and largely considered its sole success story. Similar uprisings in Libya, Syria, and Yemen have all led to protracted conflicts, while Egypt saw its elected leader, Islamist President Mohammed Morsi, deposed by the army after a year in power. es/pfd (AFP, dpa)


Third Bardo museum attacker 'on the run' A third gunman involved in an attack on Tunisia's National Bardo Museum is "on the run," according to President Essebsi. The president said his country was at war with extremists, who killed 21 people in the assault. In a live interview with French iTele TV from inside the National Bardo Museum in Tunis, President Beji Caid Essebsi confirmed that the deadly attack on March 18 involved a third gunman along with the two who were shot dead by the country's security forces. The Interior Ministry released security camera footage of the assault on Saturday, showing two armed men walking through a museum hall, and briefly encountering a third person with a backpack. "For sure there were three because they have been identified and filmed on surveillance cameras," Essebsi said. "There are two who were executed and one who is on the run somewhere. But in any case, he won't get far." Two Tunisians, believed to have trained in neighboring Libya, where the Sunni militant group "Islamic State" (IS) is thought to have training camps, opened fire in the museum on Wednesday. The assailants targeted tourists and killed 21 people, including a policeman. Four Italians, three Japanese, three French, two Spaniards, a Colombian, and Australian-Colombian, a British woman, a Belgian woman, three Poles and a Russian were killed in the attack. On Thursday, IS claimed it was behind the attack. Essebsi said that Islamists had recruited around 3,000 Tunisian nationals to fight in Syria and Iraq. He said his country was at war with them. "When war is brought upon us, we will wage war," he said. Arrests On Saturday, prosecutors in Tunisia said more than 10 people had been detained over the museum attack. "More than 10 people have been arrested for direct or indirect involvement in the attack, among them people who provided logistical support," Interior Minister spokesman Mohamed Ali Aroui told the media. Aroui would not be pushed on whether that figure included the nine people already reportedly arrested, including the father, sister and two brothers of one of the gunmen killed by police, Jabeur Khachnaoui. Aroui also said that an arrest warrant had been issued for a Tunisian national, Maher Ben Mouldi Kaidi, suspected of being involved in the assault. Tunisia has seen an increase in Islamist extremism since the 2011 revolution that ousted Zine El Abidine Ben Ali and began the Arab Spring. shs/sb (AP, Reuters, AFP)


Tunisia: Sweeping history under the rug rather than confronting the past? A proposed law designed to provide amnesty for corrupt businessmen is causing an uproar in Tunisia. Opponents accuse the government of subverting the reappraisal of the country's dictatorial past. "We don't forgive," shout a few dozen protesters gathered in front of the Tunis City Theater. They are closely encircled by police. For a week now, Tunisian citizens have been protesting on the streets almost every day. Most demonstrations are quickly dispersed by police, using truncheons and tear gas. As a result of terrorist attacks on a museum in March and a beachfront resort in June, Tunisia has been under martial law for the last two months. The Tunisian government has used that law as an excuse to crack down on protests against economic amnesty. The demonstrators' motto is "only the courts forgive." But court cases for corrupt officials, as well as businessmen and tax evaders, are not part of the new law proposed by President Beji Caid Essebsi. Instead, guilty parties can look forward to complete amnesty if they turn themselves in and pay back the misappropriated funds plus 5 percent interest per annum. The money is supposed to go into empty government coffers, which the president hopes will then spur investment. "There are many businessmen that are in a position to help Tunisia get back on its feet financially, but they are scared," says Essebsi. The "law for economic reconciliation" is designed to give them legal assurances so that they can once again invest in Tunisian markets, he maintains. Fear of a return to dictatorship Police cordoned off demonstrators in the capital, Tunis "The law is a step back towards the old mafia system," Chayma, a young demonstrator, complains. Ahmed Seddik, a parliamentarian from the leftist "Popular Front," has also joined the demonstrators to protest against "the return of the corrupt cronies of the dictatorship." He warns of a return to old structures and sees the democratic advances made since the revolution hanging in the balance. He criticizes that the new law stands in clear opposition to the reassessment of Tunisia's dictatorial past and to the constitution. The federation of trade unions has also come out in opposition to the law in its current form. However, the ruling government parties enjoy a comfortable two-thirds majority, essentially ensuring passage of the law. According to the Tunisian constitution, which was ratified in January 2014, the truth commission is in fact responsible for the investigation and reassessment of financial crimes. Yet, the first year of its four-year mandate has passed without any noteworthy progress. Several thousand victims have submitted their cases; however, neither the public hearings that were scheduled for this past spring have taken place, nor have the cases been forwarded to the judiciary. Instead, there is infighting in the commission. Six of its 15 members have resigned, or been relieved of their posts. The reasons cited for the turbulence have been political differences and criticism of the leadership style of commission chairwoman Sihem Ben Sedrine. Economic urgency Protesters view the law as a step in the wrong direction Ben Sedrine fears that should the new law pass, the commission would lose half of the cases that it is currently reviewing. "The truth commission has been reduced to a wailing wall: Come by, present your grievance, and go home. For we no longer have the right to investigate individual cases, and our work will be of absolutely no consequence." Because, according to the head of the truth commission, without an independent investigation there will be no way to understand how businesspeople could so easily enrich themselves at the expense of the people. However, she argues that this is utterly essential in order to make sure that such a situation cannot be repeated in the future. Parliamentarian Seddik says that the problems of the truth commission are no excuse for ending the reassessment of Tunisia's dictatorship. Lawyer and university professor Salsabil Klibi is also critical of the proposed law. She says it has no provisions for an independent judicial commission to investigate corruption cases, but rather turns that task over to a group of representatives from various ministries within the government. As there seem to be no alternatives to the proposed law, Klibi advocates a redrafting of its text. She thinks the principle of uncoupling financial issues from the broken truth commission in order to speed up the process is nevertheless necessary. "Unfortunately, we have to discuss this purposefully, because we have to make headway, even if we all agree that we have had enough of these crooks." The proposed law is to be discussed in Parliament soon. In the meantime, opponents are calling for nationwide protests against it this coming Saturday.


In Libya, a safe haven for refugees Migrants and refugees from Africa and beyond find shelter in a former major smuggling route to Italy. Karlos Zurutuza reports from Zuwara, Libya. Neither Suleyman, nor Ahmed or Rasool are HIV positive. It's confirmed by the medical certificates hanging at the entrance of their small restaurant in downtown Zuwara. The Nabelsi brothers came from Djerba, Tunisia, after the political earthquake that shook the whole region in 2011. The collapse of tourism in their country forced them to fold their business back home, which they later reopened on this side of the border two years ago. Djerba is just a two-hour drive. Besides, Zuwara doesn't look that foreign to them. "Many Tunisians moved to Tripoli looking for a job after the revolution, but we decided stay here because everybody here is Amazigh, the same as us," Suleyman told DW while he wrapped a new batch of sandwiches in brown paper. Also called Berbers, the Amazigh are native inhabitants of North Africa, with a population extending from Morocco's Atlantic coast to the west bank of the Nile in Egypt. Located a hundred kilometers west of Tripoli, Zuwara, a town of 50,000 habitants, is the only Amazigh enclave on the Libyan coast. Today the road that connects the city with Tripoli is blocked by a rival militia, the same as the one that leads to the Nafusa mountains - Libya's main Amazigh stronghold. Four years after Gadhafi was toppled, there are two governments in Libya, one in Tripoli and the other in Tobruk, 1,000 kilometers (620 miles) east of the capital. Chaos across the country is rife, but the Nabelsis say they have not yet decided to move again. "There's no spot safer than this one in Libya. And if things ever get ugly we can always head west and cross the border," added Suleyman. Peace in Libya There's certainly a sense of normality in this city where one in two businesses is a coffee shop. However, Zuwara would have been devoured by the rubble and debris, were it not for the work of the cleaning squad. Along with the orange jumpsuit, the distinctive Touareg turban seems to have become part of the uniform of the street sweepers in Zuwara. Over the last year, many Touareg have arrived from Libya's remote south, fleeing the war with the Tubus - a sub-Saharan people - after centuries of peaceful coexistence in the desert. Issa Shabud came from Ubari, a mainly Touareg location in southern Libya, in December. The 70-year-old Touareg looks nowhere near retirement. Touaregs like Issa Shabud have found a better life in Zuwara "I lost my house and almost everything I had to the war down there," Shabud told DW. "Someone told me that Zuwara was a very peaceful city, so I didn't think it twice," added the man who has been displaced in his own country. From the offices of the Red Crescent, Ibrahim Atushi, head of the NGO's emergency committee, said there are around 3,000 foreign workers registered in the city. "They are Tunisians, Nigerians, Malians, Gambians ... and they come not only from Africa but also from countries as far away as Pakistan or Bangladesh," underlined the official. "We know their number because they get a medical test from us," he added. The unregistered A myriad of panels and murals remembering the fallen in the 2011 war line Zuwara's Martyrs' Square. Two hundred meters to the west, the road is suddenly flanked by dozens of individuals jumping into pick-up trucks that stop momentarily for them. They are also Tunisians, Nigerians, Malians, Gambians; there are even half a dozen Bangladeshis. None of them have a medical certificate and, therefore, no work permit. They wait from dawn until late into the night along the road to get occasional work in construction, and they sleep in the crumbling stash houses nearby. Without work permits, newcomers can only hope to find casual work Halil, a 26-year-old Nigerian who agreed to speak to DW on condition of anonymity, said he lost his parents and one of his brothers in the war against Boko Haram. Eventually he fled Nigeria, but the nightmare was far from over: "Once in Tripoli a militia arrested me and handed me a cell phone to call my family. I had to tell my aunt they'd kill me if they didn't pay $500," recalled the Nigerian. After one month the money arrived, but he was released only to be captured for a second time. "Those who cannot afford to pay are either killed on the spot or sold as slaves," pointed the refugee. Many of those interviewed by this reporter said they had undergone similar experiences, but all of them claimed such abuses were unheard of in Zuwara. "Here our life is still miserable but we wouldn't dare to speak with you in the middle of the street elsewhere in Libya," Amin, a 21-year-old Gambian said. Zuwara's days as a hub of smuggling are over - for now On a good day of work, Amin can make up to 15 Libyan dinars - around $5 ($4.70). With $600 he'll be able to jump on a raft to Europe. Over 600,000 people have made the journey this year, more than twice the number over all of 2014, in what has been labeled the biggest displacement of people since World War II. Amin, however, won't be able to leave from here, since Zuwara citizens mobilized and a local brigade disbanded the local smugglers' network three months ago. "Do you know where are they leaving from now?" asked Amin, wiping his face, still covered in dust. "Can you tell us where to go?"


Tunisia reports arrests in museum attack investigation Prosecutors in Tunisia say more than 10 people have been detained over an attack on the National Bardo Museum. The "Islamic State" has claimed responsibility for the assault, which killed 20 tourists on Wednesday. "There are developments in the case, but to protect the secrecy of the investigation we prefer not to provide any details," prosecution spokesperson Sofiene Sliti told the AFP news agency on Saturday. Interior Minister Mohamad Ali Aroui was more forthcoming with details, saying "more than 10 people have been arrested for direct or indirect involvement in the attack, among them people who provided logistical support." Aroui would not be pushed on whether that figure included the nine people already reportedly arrested, including the father, sister and two brothers of one of the gunmen killed by police in Wednesday's attack, Jabeur Khachnaoui. Two Tunisians, believed to have trained in neighboring Libya where the "Islamic State" (IS) is thought to have training camps, opened fire in the National Bardo Museum on Wednesday. The gunmen targeted tourists, killing 21 people, including a policeman. Without going into detail, the interior minister also said that an arrest warrant had been issued for a Tunisian national, Maher Ben Mouldi Kaidi, suspected of being involved in the attack. Four Italians, three Japanese, three French, two Spaniards, a Colombian, and Australian-Colombian, a British woman, a Belgian woman, three Poles and a Russian were killed in Wednesday's attack. On Thursday, IS claimed it was behind the attack. Tunisia has seen an increase in Islamist extremism since the 2011 revolution that ousted Zine El Abidine Ben Ali and began the Arab Spring. jlw/msh (AP, AFP, Reuters)


Essebsi: Tunisia's father figure The new president of Tunisia is Beji Caid Essebsi. Tunisia's choice positions the country as secular and pro-Western. On the domestic front, people expect Essebsi to unite the country long-term - in spite of his age. Tunisians believe he can unite their country and make it strong again: Beji Caid Essebsi held various ministerial positions under the first president of the Tunisian republic, Habib Bourguiba (1957-1987). Now he's been tasked with reshaping the North African country. In the first round of voting one month ago, Essebsi was able to secure 36.46 percent of the vote, and he's now gained a majority in the run-off election against the outgoing interim president, Moncef Marzouki. Longing for a familiar face Essebsi is 88 years old. Not what you might expect if you're looking for someone who will make a fresh start - but Tunisians voted for Essebsi for other reasons, according to Hardy Ostry, head of the Konrad Adenauer Foundation's Tunis office. "Many Tunisians were looking for a strong personality, a father of the nation," he told DW. "The other thing is that, unlike Marzouki, he was in a position to unite instead of divide. That's what Tunisians are seeking, after the turbulence of 2013." Essebsi's opponent, Moncef Marzouki, voting on Sunday 2013 was marked by chaos under the religious-oriented transition government, whose indulgence of violent Islamist groups led to a marked worsening of the security situation. At the same time, living conditions for ordinary people rapidly deteriorated under the Islamists. That helps explain why there was a great longing for a familiar face, someone who could assume the role of father figure. No revolutionary hero In his election campaign Essebsi promised the people a modern, secular Tunisia. He didn't stand out under the autocratic leader Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali (1987-2011) as either loyal to the regime or as part of the opposition. He wasn't directly involved in the revolution at the start of 2011, but he does champion the ideas of the Arab Spring. An 88-year-old who represents the values of the angry youth? "Many young people are counting on this old man," says Hardy Ostry. "He and his party are promising to address the concerns of the youth - to combat unemployment. And no one of his age is about to establish a dictatorship - that's certainly an important aspect, too," he adds. It's hardly harmed Essebsi that he was not among those who overthrew Ben Ali in January 2011. On the contrary: Disappointment with many of the so-called "revolutionary heroes," such as the president of the Constituent Assembly, Mustapha Ben Jaafar, helped boost Essebsi's popularity. His direct rival, the former human rights campaigner Marzouki, also forfeited respect in the run-up to the election. Many Tunisians believed that, as interim president, he hadn't put enough distance between himself and the Islamists. For example, during his time in office he invited Islamist preachers who condoned violence for official visits to the presidential palace. Tunisians are hoping Essebsi can improve the economy and foster unity in the country Man of the West Essebsi is seen as a reconciler - and not only by his own people. He might also pursue a foreign policy that would seek good relations both with Tunisia's Arab neighbors and with Europe. Ostry believes that this is the case: "Essebsi will represent classic Tunisian positions. He has to maintain good relations with the neighboring countries because of Tunisia's geostrategic significance and its size," he says. And good contacts with Europe could also be very close to his heart: "Involvement during the transition period by Germany in particular was significant for him," comments Ostry. This period in Tunisia has now been going on for almost four years. The new constitution, which made the parliamentary and presidential elections in recent months possible, was only adopted in January 2014. A new Bourguiba? The name Bourguiba hangs over Essebsi's election: After years of dictatorship and chaos, many Tunisians certainly yearn for the relative stability of that time. A revival of the Bourguiba era seems, however, unlikely. Ostry comments that about two years ago, when the religious Ennahda party's initial draft constitution threatened to do away with many of the achievements made under the first president - such as gender equality or the clear separation of religion and state - there was a phase during which the Bourguiba era was glorified. This phase, Ostry says, is now over. At the time, Essebsi positioned himself as a defender of Bourguiba's ideas. "Now, though, he certainly isn't going to go out and refight the battles of the 1950s. Rather, he'll make clear that Tunisia is far more advanced now than it was then, and that what was achieved under Bourguiba must be preserved," says Ostry. To date, Tunisia has been regarded as the model of the democracy movement in North Africa. The West expects Essebsi to continue along this path. There's a great deal for Tunisia's new president to do.


Ben Mhenni, Lina Blogger, Activist, Teacher Tunis University, Correspondent for Global Voices, Tunisia Lina Ben Mhenni is a 28-year-old Tunisian blogger and internet activist. Her blog, “A Tunisian Girl”, gained worldwide fame during the Tunisian revolution 2010/11. She keeps writing about freedom of speech, human rights and challenges facing Tunisian society. Since 2008 she has also been the Tunisia correspondent for Global Voices. In 2009, after obtaining her Master’s in English Language and Literature, she started teaching linguistics at Tunis University. Since 2001 she has worked as a freelance translator for Arabic, French and English for “Kalima Radio”, where she also briefly worked as a journalist. Mhenni has received many awards, including the Deutsche Welle International Blog Award and El Mundo’s International Columnist Prize.


Opinion: Tunisia is a model for what the Arab Spring can achieve The election of political veteran Essebsi as Tunisia's first ever democratic president is a vital milestone on the way to the establishment of a true Arab democracy, says DW's Loay Mudhoon. The election of Beji Caid Essebsi as the first democratically elected president in Tunisia's history is an historic achievement - not only for the North African country, but also for all Arab nations currently in transition. This successful and surprisingly peaceful election marks the end of a difficult democratic transition in the motherland of the Arab Spring revolts. At the same time, it confirms the pioneering role that Tunisia has automatically played in a region scarred by post-revolutionary chaos, the collapse of states and the reform blockades set up by the incapable and authoritarian governing elites. Who thought Tunisia would have it so hard? The transition from the long-term dictatorship of Zine El Abidine Ben Ali to a democratic future was not supposed to be so difficult. Of all the post-revolutionary Arab states, Tunisia had the best conditions for making a successful journey to democracy and the rule of law. The country has a relatively strong civil society, a confident women's movement, good domestic negotiating bodies, like the Tunisian General Labor Union (UGTT), a relatively good education system and a well-functioning administration. On top of that, the military has rarely acted as a political body. In addition, after the departure of Ben Ali in 2011 the transition began promisingly. Following the first democratic elections for the assembly that would formulate the new constitution in October 2011, the victors agreed surprisingly quickly to a coalition government and an even distribution of the most important offices. Loay Mudhoon, Arab world analyst for DW Egypt, a scary model But starting in October 2012, the transformation process began to stagnate. Tunisians waited in vain for the promised constitution. Social and political polarization worsened, particularly after the murder of opposition politician Chokri Belaid. But dramatic events in Egypt showed Tunisia's post-revolutionary elites where extreme polarization and ideological turf battles would lead. In July 2013, following days of mass protests, the Egyptian military toppled the democratically elected Islamist President Mohammed Morsi, and summarily banned his Muslim Brotherhood - the parent organization of political Islam. That was followed by an almost complete restoration of the old Mubarak regime. Since then, the country has been regularly shaken by terrorist attacks. Economic and social crises have worsened and are threatening to make the country ungovernable. Learning from the mistakes of the Muslim Brotherhood Of course, one couldn't expect the heavy legacy of dictatorship to be overcome without fierce social confrontation. But the way in which Tunisians have negotiated a new understanding of the state and a freely-negotiated social model has been decisive. The Islamist Ennahda movement learned from the mistakes of the Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt, overwhelmed and out of touch with reality as they were, and chose a true national dialogue. They acted pragmatically in the constitutional process and decided against including Islamist references in the constitution. That meant that all political forces could agree on what is, in effect, the most progressive constitution in the Middle East, one which enshrines a balance between secular and religious citizens. Now Essebsi must act Now President-elect Essebsi and his secular-nationalist Nida Tounes party face major challenges. The country desperately needs to stabilize the security situation and implement far-reaching reforms in the security sector, as well as boost the economy which has been on its knees since the fall of Ben Ali nearly four years ago. In order to achieve this, Essebsi, who relied on the networks of the old regime in his election campaign, must effectively include the more pragmatic and solution-oriented Islamists in his program, particularly in his efforts to battle Tunisia's ticking time bomb: high unemployment. Otherwise, there is serious danger that Tunisia's youth will lose faith in the aims and achievements of the revolution - and distance themselves from this new, hard-fought social order.


Opinion: Tunisia as regional role model In Tunisia's parliamentary elections, secular forces won out against the Islamists - and progress toward democracy does not only manifests itself in the election outcome, says DW's Rainer Sollich. Nearly four years after the so-called Arab Spring began, the region is in a shocking state: Large swaths of Syria and Iraq are subject to the terror of the "Islamic State" (IS). The dictator of Damascus, Bashar al-Assad, continues to bomb parts of his citizenry. Libya and Yemen are sinking into chaos wrought by rival militias. In Egypt, the military has won back its power from the Muslim Brotherhood and is significantly curtailing Egyptians' freedom. Tensions between various ethnic and religious groups are consciously being exploited in many places in order to secure political power. In reality, everything has just gotten worse. One would almost be prepared to declare the entire Arab Spring a failure - were it not for the example of Tunisia. 'Ray of light' German Chancellor Angela Merkel is completely right in describing the small Maghreb state as a "ray of light" among the turmoil in the Arab World. Tunisia was the starting point of the wave of revolutions throughout the region. Today, it's the only country there that continues along the path toward democracy and the rule of law in a clearly visible way. It has thus far remained remarkably stable, showing progress with the peaceful unfolding and high voter turnout in the recent parliamentary elections in spite of the fear of terror strikes. Tunisians can only be congratulated on that front! DW's Rainer Sollich But Tunisia, too, is suffering from high unemployment and a lack of economic prospects. The country also has problems with the old regime's cadres and Islamists of varying shades right up to terrorists. Fortunately, the country's political class has thus far managed to address Tunisia's numerous problems in a largely peaceful way that has aimed at as much consensus as possible. In contrast to Egypt, where the Muslim Brotherhood wanted to rule on its own before being brutally pushed out of power, Islamists and secular powers in Tunisia have until now handled things in an exemplary way when it comes to preventing political power struggles from tearing the country apart or setting its development back by decades. Fair losers The initial reactions to the polls raise the hope that the country will continue down this promising path. The projected winner is the Nidaa Tounes block, in which representatives from the former regime are collaborating politically with secular forces. The Islamist Ennahda party - an ideological antipode to Nidaa Tounes - has become only the second strongest political force this time around. The Tunisian offshoot of the Muslim Brotherhood quickly admitted its defeat and congratulated the winners. Here, too, is a gesture of political culture and reasonability that one would seek in vain elsewhere in the region. Going forward, various scenarios are conceivable, and the presidential election next month could result in a further shift of power. Only this much is clear: winners Nidaa Tounes will have to form a coalition, either with the moderate Islamists in Ennahda or with another smaller secular party. The social and economic challenges ahead are enormous. For Tunisia's future, it will be of at least as much significance for the now disadvantaged Islamists to be responsibly included in the political process so that they don't radicalize from the inside out. That's at the core of the "Tunisian experiment." Europe should do all it can to support the country.


Westerwelle promotes democracy in Tunisia As the situation in Egypt remains unstable, fears of a domino-effect are growing. The Islamist government in Tunis is under pressure. Germany says it wants to support democracy in Tunisia with a development partnership. Among friends, visits occur not only when things are going well, but particularly when they are not so great, Guido Westerwelle said at the end of his two-day trip to Tunisia. The German foreign minister's visit came during an ongoing political crisis in Tunisia. Westerwelle left talks with members of the Tunisian government, opposition politicians and the trade union carefully optimistic. Even though he wasn't on an official arbitration mission, he still tried to have a "constructive influence on all parties and also make proper suggestions," Westerwelle said. Ennahda head al-Ghannouchi: afraid of an Egypt situation After all, the talks in Tunis about a way out of the crisis have been going around in circles for days. The government parties continue to reject calls to dissolve of the constitutional assembly and the government won't resign. At the same time, the opposition will not budge their demand that an independent technocrat-government lead the country to new elections as soon as possible. Even arbitration attempts by the influential trade union association UGTT, which has more than half a million members, didn't produce any tangible results. Supporting the process of democratization "It's important that the work of the constitutional assembly, the work of democratization, is continued," Westerwelle said. He added that Germany wanted to support the democratization process, but without taking sides. All parties should move closer together and work for a consensus, Westerwelle said without revealing details about the talks. While the German foreign minister met with two opposition parties of the liberal center during his visit, the Popular Front was not among them - just like during Westerwelle's visit in March. According to local polls, the Popular Front is the third strongest political party in Tunisia. Chokri Belaid, who was killed in February, and Mohamed Brahmi, who was killed July 25, were both members of the Popular Front. The party coalition is an especially strong advocator for a political new beginning in Tunisia. Thousands of people regularly take to the streets to protest against the Tunisian government "No second Egypt" Tunisia mustn't turn into a second Egypt, Westerwelle said. The situation there is observed warily in Tunisia. All political groups adamantly condemn the violence in Cairo, but the Islamist Ennahda party is especially worried. Members of the country's biggest party fear that the attacks against the Muslim Brotherhood could also endanger the Tunisian government. Party leader Rached al-Ghannouchi asked Tunisians to learn from the events in Egypt and opt for consensus. "That's the only way we can prevent a Tunisian Sisi from gaining power," he said at a press conference in Tunis, referring to the commander-in-chief of the Egyptian military, who is currently pulling the strings in Cairo. German interest in stability Westerwelle and Tunisian Prime Minister Ali Larayedh want to continue their close cooperation Al-Ghannouchi said the government was open for talks and the inclusion of more parties, but he rejected the idea of establishing an independent expert-led government. He added that Tunisia needed to continue down the path that was chosen with the election of the constitution commission. Al-Ghannouchi explained that elections could be held in his country before the end of the year. However, national and international observers have said that timeline is unrealistic because there is currently neither a valid election law, nor an independent authority who could organize the vote. Germany has been one of Tunisia's most important trading partners for years, and thus has a vested interest in economical and political stability in the small Mediterranean country. Ever since the revolution in January 2011, Berlin has financed more than 100 development projects in Tunisia under the umbrella of the so-called "Transformation Partnership." Germany wants to support the security realm in Tunisia as well. Help would be sent to aid Tunisian forces with mine removal, Westerwelle said. Over the last months, anti-person-mines planted by terrorists had repeatedly killed Tunisian soldiers.


Tunisia caught between panic and resignation Attempted attacks on hotels and assaults on security forces have awakened dark memories in Tunisia. Officials have tried turning a blind eye to the violence but are beginning to recognize the problem. Bags are checked at the entrance of shops and hotels, the street in front of the Interior Ministry and the French embassy in downtown Tunis is closed off to traffic, more police than usual are out and about. The heightened tension is still palpable in the Tunisian capital after failed attack attempts in the tourist hotspots Sousse and Monastir on Wednesday (30.10.2013). In the historic part of Tunis, the streets are buzzing - albeit only with locals. There are hardly any tourists around. Ghazi stands in his little store, where he sells jewelry and traditional, colorful leather shoes. His customers used to be mostly tourists. "There is no business at all anymore," he said. "If things continue like this, I'll go out of business soon." Business has been going downhill since the revolution. Tourism decreased by roughly 40 percent compared to 2010. This week's attacks have not helped the bleak situation, according to Ghazi and his neighbors. "Tourists are safe here" The street leading to Tunisia's Interior Ministry is closed to the public Ghazi cannot imagine that a similar attack could occur and actually kill civilians: "I'm not afraid of that," he said. "After all, we are all Tunisians who love their country." Tourists are safe and the attempted attack was just an isolated event, Ghazi added. Mary and her husband are sitting on a stoop watching people in the streets. The two British tourists haven't heard about the attacks. "We feel safe here," they both said. Since the beginning of the year, Tunisia lost 19 members of the National Guard and the military. Many suspected terrorists have died in the state's retributive attacks. But, so far, the civilian population has been spared. The failed attack attempts evoke dark memories, not only in Tunisia. In April 2002, more than 20 people, including 14 German tourists, died in an attack on the El Ghriba Synagogue on the island of Djerba. For locals, the parallels to the summer of 1987 are even stronger. Just a few months before Zine El Abidine Ben Ali's coup against then-President Habib Bourguiba, four hotels in the Sousse and Monastir region were attacked. The plot was attributed to the predecessor organization of today's government party, Ennahda. The regime back then used the attacks to justify and reinforce the suppression of the Islamists, who were growing in strength. The problem of gun running The country's security currently suffers from a number of issues. Ever since the uprising in January 2011, the groups at the edge of Tunisian society have become increasing radical. Potential terrorists profit from borders to neighboring Libya that have become more porous since the fall of dictator Muammar Gaddafi. The most important smuggling route for weapons headed from Algeria to northern Mali runs through Tunisia. Securing the borders in the southern desert is nearly impossible. "The Tunisians are very scared," said Chokri Hamada, a speaker of the police union. "We have to be really professional now for the war against the terrorists to be successful." Hardly any tourists make their way to Tunis' historic city center anymore Tunisia's government has long turned a blind eye to the issue and denied they had a problem with violent groups. As recently as November 2012, then-Interior Minister and current Pprime Minister Ali Laarayedh said there were no terrorist training camps in Tunisia. Today, the government believes the radical Salafist group Ansar al-Sharia is responsible for the attacks and for the murders of two opposition politicians in February and July 2013. But how strong Ansar al-Sharia is and whether they are indeed behind the attacks remains unclear. Former Chief of Staff of the Tunisian Armed Forces Rachid Ammar stepped down in June. In an interview for the occasion, he cautioned very clearly against the growing danger of violent assaults by extremists. "They want the state, the way it exists now, to break down," he said. "They want new bases, and a new system to take its place. Unfortunately, we are not talking about a small group of people."


Tunisia's break dancers spin away from extremism Young men in Tunisia are taking up break dancing as a way to combat hopelessness. In tumultuous times for their country, having a creative outlet can divert them from a path of extremism, dancers say. A b-boy with a Red Bull cap breaks down the steps for two teenagers, shouting footwork instructions over the blasting music. He shows them how to spin and where to put their hands. On the opposite corner of the youth center's main room, another trainer starts to drill a group of beginners. He pairs them up and asks them to push forward until one of them steps back. He says break dance is all about attitude. "With b-boys in the floor, you have to be so aggressive," says Azmi Laifi, a 24-year old who works as a home decorator and spends the rest of his time on the dance floor. "In the battle, you will look different. Just in the battle." Using break dance to release anger, channel energy and turn them into something positive, that's what Nidhal Bouallagui had in mind when he started touring Tunisia's central region last fall with his crew. The first workshops took place in Ben Aoun just a few weeks after clashes broke out there between gunmen and the military, killing eight. "I thought that if we could draw young people to cultural activities, this would help appease tensions and also show Tunisians that there's great potential and creativity in this region," Bouallagui said. "Break dance is our way put some fun and joy in people's lives ... And they need it! Most of the boys I meet are depressed because their situation here is so bad." Fertile ground for extremists It's that kind of hopelessness that touched off the revolution, more than three years ago. It all started in Bouallagui's hometown, Sidi Bouzid, when a young fruit vendor set himself on fire after an argument with the police. That was, quite literally, the spark that ignited the unrest and toppled President Zine el Abidine Ben Ali. Despite some political progress, young people in Tunisia are struggling for job opportunities Tunisians have since elected an assembly and passed a democratic constitution this January. For many observers, Tunisia has become the rare success story of the Arab Spring, but young people across the country are still grappling with scarce economic opportunities. Over 40 percent of them are out of work - one of the highest youth unemployment rates in North Africa. Bouallagui says the discontent has been fertile ground for extremist groups. "Ask anyone on the street and he'll tell you one of his brothers is in Syria. It's like my whole neighborhood has gone there. That's because life in this country has nothing to offer, there's no hope, no job, nothing. So it will be easy to convince a young guy to go for jihad, to give his life to God and maybe go to heaven. He'll pick that over the life he has here." Bouallagui saw this play out, up close. His own brother went to Syria for eight months last year. "He wanted to get married," he says, "but in Tunisia, that requires having a job and a house - and he had neither." His brother has since returned to Tunisia, but he's still active among Salafists, Tunisia's most influential Islamist movement, which preaches a strict version of Islam. "He disapproves of what I do. For him, break dance is un-Islamic. We rarely talk, and just go on with our respective lives." Thousands of Tunisians have gone to fight in Syria's civil war alongside militants linked to al Qaeda Security threat Tunisia's authorities say up to 2,000 Tunisian nationals are currently fighting in Syria, most of them with militias aligned with al Qaeda. But the violence hasn't just been exported. Tunisia has also found itself with a security problem of its own. "For the first time in Tunisia, we saw two high-profile politicians murdered, a string of clashes with armed forces...even a suicide bomber in a resort town on the coast," said Issam Khemakhem, the head of a leading youth organization in Tunis, the capital. According to Khemakhem, Tunisian authorities have been too soft with radical groups, and too slow to address youth problems. And while Nidhal's break dance workshops deserve some praise, bottom line, he said, dance is no real fix. "It's nice to let the steam off but if you have five people in your family who are without jobs, without income, and live on $1 or $2 (70 euro cents - 1.40 euros) a day , it's not going to make your life any easier." More than dancers It doesn't put food on the table, but the b-boys of Sidi Bouzid give something precious to young Tunisians: a sense of belonging, said Wissem Missaoui, head of the Bridge to Democracy Program, a USAID-funded initiative. Break dancing is a way for young men to channel their anger, says Bouallagui "The youth problem especially in the interior of the country is that they don't feel like they belong to anything. They feel marginalized. And that's why they're easily attracted by the extremist group, by violent, criminal groups. And the Rocking Steps Crew, they get this. They are countering this appeal by creating a space where young people can express themselves, a space where they belong." Missaoui has worked with the Rocking Steps Crew (Bouallagui's b-boys troupe) on a number of civic initiatives, such as rallying locals to clean up and repaint an impoverished neighborhood of Sidi Bouzid. "When I met these guys back in 2011, all they wanted to do is dance. Now look at them! They've become leaders in their communities." At the end of the break dance workshop, two dozen teenagers put their names and phone numbers down. Bouallagui says whenever someone doesn't show up at an event, he calls and tries to figure out the problem. "We've become more than dancers around here, that's for sure" he says. "We're like youth counselors too."


Tunisia: Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle meets with journalists and bloggers There's no democracy without freedom of the press: those were the encouraging words the German Foreign Minister gave to media workers in Tunis. DW-AKADEMIE has been working with journalists and bloggers there since 2011. At an interview during his visit to Tunisia, German Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle answered questions from mainly young journalists working at the Tunisian state broadcaster's editorial desks. They were interested in his perceptions of the country one year after the Tunisian revolution and in the type of German support their country could expect. Bloggers who had participated in a three-day DW-AKADEMIE Young Media Summit held in Tunis last December attended a discussion following the interview. "Freedom of the press and freedom of expression are the prerequisites for building a democratic society," Westerwelle said. "Tunisians can be a role model for others in Arab countries." The German Foreign Minister emphasized that a journalist's responsibility in building a democracy was to provide fair and objective reporting. He urged them to exercise their right to freedom of expression and said Germany is supporting them in this, referring to DW-AKADEMIE projects. "Our intense work and diverse media projects over the past year means we are now known in the country," says Michael Tecklenburg, coordinator for North Africa. Last year, DW-AKADEMIE held more than ten workshops in Tunisia for radio and television journalists from state and private media, as well as various conferences. Projects will continue in 2012 with support from Germany's Foreign Ministry.


Femen activists freed in Tunisia Three European women from the protest group Femen have arrived home after their release from jail in Tunisia. They received suspended sentences for showing their bare breasts in public and were charged with indecency. The three activists, held in the prison in Manouba in northeastern Tunisia until just before midnight, arrived back home on Thursday. The 20-year-old German Josephine Markmann and French nationals Pauline Hillier and Marguerite Stern were on Wednesday handed suspended sentences of four month and one day for indecency after apologizing for their actions. "I didn't think it was going to shock Tunisians to that extent. Given the consequences, I would never do it again. We want to return to our country and our loved ones," Pauline Hillier said at Wednesday's appeal court hearing. Display of solidarity The three activists were arrested in Tunis on May 29 during their topless protest in support of Tunisian activist Amina Sboui. Sboui had made the headlines in March when she protested for women's rights by posting topless photos of herself online. On May 19, she was arrested for protesting against a planned gathering of radical Salafists in the town of Kairouan. During their protest, the three European women were wearing nothing but skimpy shorts as they demonstrated outside the courthouse to demand the release of activist Amina Sboui, with slogans such as "Free Amina" and "Breasts feed revolution" written across their chests. They were arrested for offending public morals and threatening public order and handed custodial sentences for an attack on public morals, which was criticized by the European Union as being too harsh. Femen originated in Ukraine and has used nudity to push for greater rights for women across Europe. The release of the activists comes ahead of a planned visit to Tunisia by French President Francois Hollande in July. rg/slk (Reuters, AFP, dpa, AP)


Tunisia: Young Media Summit North African and German bloggers met in Tunis at the end of November to take part in the Young Media Summit co-organized by DW Akademie. "Our work isn't over yet and neither is the revolution," said Tunisian blogger Ramzi Bettaieb at the Young Media Summit in Tunis. "We can point out things that aren't heading in the right direction and draw people’s attention to them." DW Akademie had organized the three-day meeting in the Tunisian capital together with the bloggers' collective Nwaat and Radio Kalima. Some 30 young bloggers from Mauritania, Morocco, Algeria, Tunisia and Germany took part. Michael Tecklenburg, deputy head of DW Akademie's Africa division said, "This is the right time to be discussing the future of the bloggers as well as the future of the media." A discussion on differences between the North African and German blogospheres was part of the program and was conducted by Asiem El Dhifraoui, an analyst with the German Institute for International and Security Affairs. Participants also visited some of the primary revolution locations. And the Tunisian bloggers showed where they had been and how they had experienced the upheaval. "It's hard to digest all these impressions right now," wrote German blogger Eva Schulz in her blog, "Hurra!" A workshop with consultant Christian Baier on financing projects and simulating project proposals was also part of the program, as was a podium discussion on the risks and dangers for bloggers, with Olivia Gré, head of the newly-opened Reporters Without Borders office, Ramzi Bettaieb from the Nawaat blog collective and political analyst Asiem El Dhifraoui. Gré emphasized that bloggers needed as much protection as journalists. Mélissa Rahmouni, a Franco-Algerian participant, pointed to the increasing censorship in Algeria, saying it was putting many bloggers in danger. She encouraged a more intense dialogue with Tunisian bloggers on how they were protecting themselves from surveillance. This December DW Akademie is holding an additional workshop in Tunisia in which bloggers and journalists will work jointly on issues pertaining to online ethics and responsibilities.


Tunisia's ruling Islamist Ennahda party holds rally Thousands have rallied in Tunisia to support the ruling Ennahda party. Meanwhile, the prime minister has threatened to resign if an interim government is not approved. Thousands of demonstrators gathered on Tunis' main boulevard Saturday to bolster support for Ennahda. The moderate Islamist party is under attack after accusations of political responsibility for the death of opposition leader Chokri Belaid on February 6. At the rally, demonstrators aimed to show support for the constitutional assembly, whose work on a new constitution suffered a major setback after the assassination of Belaid, which led leftist parties to withdraw their participation. On Saturday, Prime Minister Hamadi Jebali, the leader of Enahda, threatened to resign unless his party and other coalition members accepted his proposals for an interim government of technocrats. He originally proposed the plan on Wednesday, amid public outrage at Belaid's murder. The ruling Ennahda have, however, rejected the plan. Jebali said he would present his new Cabinet "by the middle of next week by the latest," the official TAP news agency reported Saturday. Anti-French sentiments The Ennahda demonstrators also protested "French interference" after comments made earlier in the week by French Interior Minister Manuel Valls who called Belaid's murder an attack on "the values of Tunisia's Jasmine revolution." Waving flags of the Ennahda party and shouting "Get out, France," the demonstrators also chanted, "The people still want Ennahda" and "The revolution continues" as they marched along the central Habib Bourguiba Avenue. The avenue served as the center of the 2011 revolution that toppled long-standing President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali, sparking the Arab Spring revolutions. Since then, the Ennahda party has governed in a coalition with two secular parties. On Friday, Belaid's funeral drew an estimated 40,000 mourners and turned into a massive anti-government rally. Belaid, the coordinator of the leftist Popular Front coalition, was shot by an unknown attacker outside his house on Wednesday. He had been a vocal critic of the government in recent months, and his family blamed Ennahda for the shooting, but the party has denied any involvement. The assassination has highlighted the tension between religious and secular Tunisians. hc/ccp (Reuters, dpa, AFP)


Egypt's el-Sissi courts Saudi king There were great expectations as Saudi King Abdulllah made a stopover in Egypt. And while he was only briefly in Cairo, his visit was highly important for Egypt - but few are sure how. His last official visit to a foreign country was more than four years ago - and that has led to plenty of speculation. Egyptians expected Saudi Arabia's King Abdullah to take up serious subjects with the newly elected Egyptian president, Abdel Fattah el-Sissi: Egypt's economic recovery, mutual anti-terror operations and a pan-Arabic alliance to combat the West and Israel. Some Egyptian commentators went further, welcoming that Egypt might "finally return to the cradle of its mother nation" - or suggesting with more restraint that it represented rapprochement between the countries of the Gulf and the Nile. Even if that conjecture was a bit overblown - the Saudi stopped for an in-plane photo-op on Cairo's tarmac on his way back home from vacation in Morocco - the talk remains significant. It was the first real meeting for Egypt's new president with a foreign head of state; el-Sissi had originally expected to travel to Saudi Arabia himself. Egypt's economy, without financial assistance from the Gulf states - specifically Saudia Arabia - would have been driven to ruin. Since the revolution in 2011, the country has been dependent on international aid. The EU, US and Qatar have all sent funds to Cairo. Egyptians place great hope in el-Sissi Previously, it was the emirate of Qatar that played an active role. When the Muslim Brotherhood came to power under former Egyptian President Mohammed Morsi, the emirate's financial contributions were used by Morsi as a shield against his critics. Because it was clear to everyone at that time that subsidies from abroad were needed urgently. Only Morsi was able to loosen the Qatari's purse strings. The Saudis were more reserved at the time due to differences between their own Wahhabism and the Brotherhood. The EU and US promised aid once the Muslim Brotherhood fell from power - funds that, to this day, have yet to arrive. Falling out of favor Here, the small desert state on the Gulf is unrelenting in its pursuit of its interests in Egypt. These are directed against its big neighbor Saudi Arabia. The entire Qatari foreign policy, with its only 200,000 indigenous Qatari citizens, is driven by the fear of one day becoming swallowed by the Saudis. But after the Muslim Brothers fell from grace on June 30, 2013 in Egypt and later in Saudi Arabia, and classified as a terrorist organization in both countries, the tide has turned. The Qataris are considered enemies of the state because of their support for the Muslim Brotherhood. The Cairo offices of the Qatari channel Al-Jazeera were closed and its reporters arrested. Again and again in the streets of Cairo there are pictures of the Emir of Qatar, Tamim bin Hamad Al Thani spray-painted with the Star of David. The message: The Qataris have betrayed the Arab brothers and have taken up with the Israelis. Their common enemy: Egypt, the largest Arab country. Qatar is eyed with suspicion in Egypt Fraternal assistance Europe and the US would rather wait and see what happens next. That means the Egyptians can only turn to the Gulf states. So el-Sissi is playing the same game as his predecessor Morsi. Only he can make billions from the Gulf states flow - and his critics know it. This is why his visit appears all the more significant. It is a gesture, an acknowledgment that the Gulf States, Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, Kuwait and Bahrain are on the side of Egypt, and that they support el-Sissi's policies. How el-Sissi will deal with his critics is still unclear. He repeatedly stressed that rebuilding the economy and restoring security are top priorities - even at the expense of human rights. The mass death sentences in Minya, the repressive law on demonstrations that is still in effect and the harsh sentences against secular political activists are a foretaste of his rule. Above all, the activists who were instrumental in the 2011 revolution see in these policies a return to the police state under Hosni Mubarak, the ousted president, against whom they had taken to the streets. The Muslim Brotherhood, however, is continuing to lose support among the population, and has suffered severe setbacks over the last twelve months, even abroad. Children of the revolution skeptical The secular-minded young people who took part in the revolution cast a skeptical gaze on the advances towards the conservative Gulf states. In social networks they warn that Egypt could become a vassal of Saudi Arabia, which actively tried to prevent the Arab Spring, pointing out that former Tunisian dictator Zine El Abidine Ben Ali took refuge with the Saudi royal family. Before Abdullah's visit to Cairo, they even speculated that the Saudi king was only coming to visit his old friend Mubarak in the hospital, after he broke a thigh bone earlier in the week. El-Sissistill enjoys strong support among the population, who place tremendous hopes in him. This popularity is an opportunity for him to lead the country out of crisis. But this must not come at the expense of other political forces, whether revolution youth or Muslim brothers, who are currently forced into silence. For they will not be silent forever.


Tunisia hosts alter-globalization event This year's World Social Forum (WSF) is the first of its kind as it's hosted by an Arab Spring country - Tunisia. Local activists hope it will boost the democratization process. Activists are expected to come together in Tunis to attend the World Social Forum (WSF), which kicks off on Tuesday (26.03.2013). This year's motto is "dignity" - just what people on the streets in Tunisia were fighting for some two years ago, chanting "work, freedom and dignity." Tunisia's hosting of the forum has great significance, according to Mouhieddine Cherbib, a member of the WSF's organizing committee. "After the revolution, it certainly means a lot," he said. Asking questions about issues regarding social justice, economics and security in order to raise standards is important, Cherbib added. These discussions wouldn't have been possible under Ben Ali's dictatorship, he said. The revolution is not quite over yet: protests after the murder of a secular opposition figure "You have to imagine that a worker from Redeyef [a mining region in Tunisia's southwest] was unable to meet his German, French, Belgian or Mongolian counterparts. But today he can meet them, Cherbib said. "And that's exactly what the WSF is aiming for." The questions raised at WSF panels are also at the heart of Tunisia's debates on democracy and justice, he added. High expectations The WSF was launched in 2001 as a counter conference to the World Economic Forum in Davos. More than 3,000 workshops, demonstrations and concerts are scheduled to take place in Tunis this week. Organizers expect up to 50,000 participants from around the world to discuss globalization and labor issues, women's rights and other matters concerning the future. Demonstrators at the World Social Forum in 2012 in Brazil A women's meeting and a mass rally leading the protestors to Tunis' city center marks the start of the forum on Tuesday. There won't be a special focus on the Arab world, but many members of Tunisian civil society are hopeful that the forum will boost the local democracy movement. The fight against extremists and an exacerbating economic crisis have battered the country. "Our process toward democracy is moving very slowly. I hope the forum can contribute to improving it," Cherbib said. Troublesome logistics Women's rights activist and board member of the Tunisian League of Human Rights Halima Jouini got involved in preparations for the forum to strengthen the country's transformation. "We want things to change. We want more social justice, gender equality and democracy," she said, adding that Tunisia shouldn't have to endure dictatorship ever again. "We hope that this forum will allow us to take a deep breath and continue the fight for democracy and participation with regained strength." It's the first time that Tunisia is hosting such a big event, and organizers faced numerous problems. Some of the half a million euros ($650 million) promised by governments and international donors have still not been paid. Accommodating participants from developing countries who can't afford hotel rooms is also a challenge. One thing, however, worked in their favor: Tunisian airport ground staff called off a strike at the very last minute.


Germany pledges further investment aid for Tunisia German Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle became the first Western official to meet with Tunisia’s new Prime Minister, Al Larayed, on Tuesday. Westerwelle pledged German investment to Tunisia’s emerging democracy. Westerwelle's meeting with Larayed on Tuesday in Tunis comes on the heels of Larayed's inauguration last week. In a press conference following the meeting, Westerwelle said Germany supported Tunisia's wobbly progression toward democracy following the country's revolution at the start of the Arab Spring two years ago. "Violence, extremists and fanatics must not form the image of Tunisia but rather respect, democracy, the rule of law and tolerance and we want to help," Westerwelle said. "I am not here to give ultimatums but to express friendship, solidarity and support. But it is obvious – the more stable, reliable and democratic the development of the country, the easier it will be for European and German investments to come to Tunisia." Tunisia has precariously hung on to the stability achieved after the fall of former dictator Zine El Abidine Ben Ali in 2011. Unrest has prevented the formation of a government until the last few weeks. Westerwelle's Tunisian counterpart, Othmane Jarandi, said Tunisia was urgently seeking the “economic support from its friends.” He added he hoped Germany's example would prompt other countries to trust and support the Tunisia government. As part of a “transformation partnership” initiative Germany has established with some Arab Spring countries, a total of 50 million euros ($64.5 million) in development aid, debt relief and subsidies has been contributed to Tunisia, according to the German Foreign Ministry. On Thursday, Tunisian President Moncef Marzouki is expected in Berlin to meet with President Joachim Guack. He is also scheduled to meet with Chancellor Angela Merkel on Friday. mz/jm (dpa, AFP)


The struggle for Tunisia's future When demonstrators took to the streets in Tunisia at the start of the Arab Spring, they were calling for bread, dignity and justice. What they got was the end of a dictatorship and political uncertainty. On the morning of March 13 this year, 27 year-old Adel Khedri set himself alight in the middle of the Tunisian capital, Tunis. "Look here," he is said to have shouted "this is a young man who sells cigarettes because he is unemployed." His words and actions were a cry for help in the face of poverty and lack of perspective; indicative of all that has gone wrong in the two years since Tunisia's revolution, itself ironically triggered by a vegetable trader setting himself on fire. Both men came from the countryside. The stolen revolution In Adel's home village of Souk Jemaa, decisions made by the newly formed government, the Constituent Assembly, have done nothing to improve the standard of living. Like some three million Tunisians, the deceased's family live hand-to-mouth in simple, dark and barely heated houses. On the whole state politics pass them by. But Adel's death is different. His funeral became a demonstration in which the poor furiously called for the government to step down. After years of being ignored by former leader Ben Ali, they have had enough of being at the bottom of the pile. So far, however, the post-revolution era has done nothing to change their lot. Adel's cousin Ahmed Khazri says it is because people are not at the heart of politics in Tunisia. "Politicians do nothing but debate and fight about power," he said. It is disappointing for those who demonstrated and hoped for change, and many are now talking in terms of a "stolen revolution." A different kind of despotism Their way or the highway?  The fight for power in Tunisia is in full swing, and the country could go in one of two directions: Toward democracy with a clear separation between religion and politics, or to a theocracy governed by Shariah law. Sofiane Chourabi, a blogger-turned-journalist, believes the majority of Tunisians favour a traditionalist Islamist political system that enjoys the financial and moral backing of rich, conservative Sunni neighbors such as Saudi Arabia and Qatar. That same system, she says, has a place for a "new breed of tyrant," that replaced the despotic hand of an authoritarian state. She is referring to youth groups who reprimand women for wearing un-Islamic clothing, and young men for drinking alcohol. Salafists make themselves heard Amel Grami, professor for equality and intercultural studies in Tunis, knows how it feels to by tyrannised. Her desire for a modern understanding of Islam, and a liberal society, has led to death threats over the telephone and rants on social media sites. "The men with beards are angry," she said. "They call me a Zionist, a Christian preacher." Concerned for her own safety, Grami now steers clear of certain parts of the capital. The Salafists, who are responsible for the threats, have only become visible since the fall of Ben Ali. Sofiane estimates that there are between 10,000 and 20,000 of them in Tunisia, albeit in different groups. Some are more violent than others, some are close to al Qaeda, but what they have in common is that they all defame so-deemed "infidels." Some of the groups emerged from the "League for the Protection of the Revolution," which was responsible for order and security during the revolution. The Ennahda Movement, which is now the strongest party in Tunisia's legislature, relied on groups willing to use violence, forming militias by recruiting disaffected young men from the provinces. They were given money, a status and a combat mission, and suddenly their futures looked bright. These militias have since been officially registered, but are still not entirely above board. A return to a new form of authoritarianism? Mosque and backroom discourse Amel Grami describes Ennahda's internal policies as "mosque and backroom discourse," that the wider world hears nothing about. And it is that very lack of transparency that Sofiane Chourabi finds worrying. She describes it is a potentially explosive situation that could easily lead to a civil war, not least because Ennahda and the government turn a blind eye to the violence. The fact is that Ennahda, which was not involved in the early days of the protests, is the only people's party with a presence throughout the entire country. The movement has come a long way since the days of Ben Ali's rule, when supporters were persecuted and imprisoned, tortured and murdered. Its leader, Rachid Ghannouchi believes in slow societal change. "Laws," he says "can't change a society unless the society wants to change." But Amel Grami and Sofiane Chourabi don't like the shift toward Islamic conservatism and dogmatism in the country's mosques, or the fact that alternative approaches to life are dubbed "un-Islamic." While Egypt has been through this development over the past two decades, it is new territory for Tunisia. Chourabi describes the development as the slow emergence of a dictatorship, and says the secular partners in the government coalition are too weak to redress the balance. Democracy is considered "un-Islamic" Emna Menif says the country wasn't prepared Doctor and activist Emna Menif is an active secularist, who spends what tie she can encouraging her fellow citizens to embrace the idea of a liberal and tolerant Tunisia. But given that many citizens consider democracy to be un-Islamic, and even linked to the secular system of dictator Ben Ali, she has her work cut out for her. Menif says Tunisia went into the revolution without asking what would happen after the dictatorship and that the country is only now asking those all-important questions. Too little too late? "Our politicians don't take people's worries and fears seriously enough," she laments. And as a result many are disillusioned with the whole concept of democracy. Fertile ground for a new democracy? They include well-educated young people who are unable to find work in the new Tunisia. Hamza is a case in point. He studied French, but when the tourism industry collapsed he was out of work. He doesn't see the point in voting in the next election, and says he would rather see Ben Ali back at the helm. "It might have been a political dictatorship, but it allowed normal people to lead normal lives." And he is not the only one who sees things this way. Sofiane Chourabi says the problem is that Tunisian society is still living with the trauma of a dictatorship, and that the revolution was political, not cultural. The latter is a harder nut to crack because it requires changing people's basic thinking. "Our society was fertile ground for a dictatorship - there was a mental disposition," she says, adding that that has not yet changed.


Pirates want to use the Internet to change Tunisia Tunisia's Pirate Party has struggled to enter mainstream politics for two years. Unsurprisingly, they've had a hard time selling their transparency platform to voters concerned with basic needs. It is the first interview Wassim Ben Ayed, co-founder of Tunisia's Pirate Party, or Hizb-al-Qarasina in Arabic, has ever given. The excited 24-year-old moves restlessly back and forth in his chair. He wants to know whether his English is good enough, or if he is speaking too fast. Ben Ayed does not want to do anything to leave a bad impression. "We may be a bit lazy," he says, "but laziness leaves space for good ideas. We ultimately want to change the world." Citizen participation wanted The Pirates want Tunisians to have more of a say and become directly involved in political decisions. The upstart party says that would make the government and administration work more openly. The Internet played a big role in Tunisia's revolution The Pirates also want the government to provide information on who initiates legislation in parliament, members' attendance, voting records and more. Further, the party wants parliamentary debates to be broadcast so citizens get the chance to directly raise questions and objections. The Pirates want to do all this through the Internet and Web 2.0 methods like chats, crowdsourcing, Facebook and Twitter. And they say that is just the beginning. These are the Pirates' main objectives around the world. The first Pirate Party was found in Sweden in 2006. Since then, groups have sprung up around the world from Guatemala to New Zealand. Tunisia's Pirates are party number 29, and the first in Africa - something Ben Ayed is especially proud of. Pirates have successfully won seats in parliament in Germany and Sweden, a dream Ben Ayed shares. Numbering 40 members, with an equal number of non-member supporters, the Tunisian Pirates are just four months old. All were present at last year's revolution in Tunisia. In March of this year, they were finally allowed to form a party. Opposition stance Ben Ayed actually wanted to start up a Tunisian Pirate Party two years ago, when members initially joined forces. But his efforts at the time failed owing to the rule of since-deposed President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali. While Ben Ali officially tolerated seven parties, the Pirates' applications to join the list failed. Ben Ali got a life sentence last month Revolution brought new opportunities. The Pirates wanted to participate in general elections held afterwards, but their ranks were divided. Ben Ayed says the group was not ready at the time, but will be for the next ballots. Those likely won't be for a while to come. Tunisia is not scheduled to hold another ballot until a new constitution is written, which is expected next year. Until then, the Pirates are taking an opposition stance and vigorously criticizing the current government coalition, led by the Islamist party Ennahda. The Pirates say the government is not doing enough to involve citizens in drafting a new constitution and that the coalition does not explain its policies. Connection problems However, Mabrouka M’barek, a member of parliament with the Congress for the Republic (CPR) party, part of the ruling coalition, says criticizing is not enough. The 32-year-old wants to see more support from the Pirates. She knows how hard it is to bring about more transparency in Tunisia: When information about parliament or committee meetings went missing, she  published it on her own website. She has also tweeted during meetings and asked followers for feedback. But her colleagues complain the practice could reveal state secrets. Mbeki shares similar aims with the Pirates Most Tunisians are little moved by the Pirates' main concerns. Tunisians long for work and stability, not political participation. They put the responsibility for voting on politicians. According to the website Internet World Stats, only about 30 percent of Tunisians have Internet access. A party platform based on the net can only reach a third of the population, even in the best-case scenario. With its emphasis on the Internet, the Pirate Party seems ahead of the times in Tunisia. It will be a while before its concerns speak to ordinary voters. "We're working on it," Ben Ayed says. But first, the Pirates want to be gain a free voice for themselves. While censorship officially ended with the fall of Ben Ali, Ben Ayed says Tunisians are still being monitored. "The old monitoring system is still there," he adds. Ben Ayed wants to lead his Pirates in a fight against that system. He doesn't know just how, but is confident they will find the right ideas together. Even if they are a little lazy sometimes. Authors: Viktoria Kleber and Hendrik Hinzel / srs Editor: Simon Bone


Opinion: The people have spoken In Tunisia's first free elections, the people appear to have handed victory to the Islamist party, Ennahda. Rainer Sollich, head of DW's Arab Service, asks whether this is a cause for concern. Tunisia has fewer inhabitants than metropolitan Cairo - and yet it has managed to make history in a big way. At the beginning of the year, the Tunisians were the first in the Arab world to have the courage to force their authoritarian rulers from power. In a revolution heard around the world, they showed that freedom, democracy and human rights weren't just ideals imported from the West. They managed to get the international community to respect them and, most important, they led the way for similar revolutionary movements in countries like Egypt, Libya, Syria, Bahrain and Yemen. Following Sunday's election, the country which gave birth to the Arab Spring once again has every reason to be proud. The vote went off almost without a hitch. Voter turnout was sensationally high, and voting irregularities remained the exception. The Tunisian people took a further decisive step toward their own future and the establishment of a democracy, providing an example for all Arab people who not only wish to free themselves from their own longtime dictators, but at the same time strive toward a new, citizen-led stability. Rainer Sollich, head of DW's Arab Service However, we must realize that despite the successful Tunisian vote and future free elections in other Arab countries, the end result won't necessarily lead to governments with pro-Western sympathies. As with previous elections in Algeria and the Palestinian territories, an Islamist party has also apparently received the most votes in Tunisia, a traditionally secular country. The fact that many Tunisians also voted for a number of non-Islamist parties shouldn't be overlooked, but support in this camp remains divided. The reasons for the success of the Islamist Ennahda party are many. Based on reports, the party apparently received professional support during the election campaign from Saudi Arabia and other Arab states in the Persian Gulf. After a decades-long resistance against the regime of former dictator Zine El Abidine Ben Ali, the party garnered the trust and backing of the people. Ennahda appealed to the values of the conservative Muslim population, taking care to avoid fundamentalism and instead promote a moderate interpretation of Islam. Party members pledged to tackle Tunisia's many economic problems - the country suffers from extremely high unemployment, especially among its youth. The apparent electoral success of the Islamists must now be accepted by their political rivals and the international community. It has reflected the will of the people. And yet, there is still cause for concern. Will civil liberties be curtailed under new religious laws? How credible are Ennahda's assertions that it will support democracy, human rights and equality for men and women? In these respects, Tunisia is further ahead than any Arab nation - this must not be allowed to change. Ennahda will be closely watched, not only by the international community but also by Tunisians themselves. They now have the chance to show that Islam, democracy and modern values are able to coexist. Author: Rainer Sollich / cmk Editor: Andy Valvur


Tunisia struggles to find way out of crisis Tunisia needs to tackle the ongoing economic and political crises. Many expect the Islamist Ennahda party to again dominate the country's political future. The political crisis in Tunisia is getting worse. After the resignation of Prime Minister Hamadi Jebali, the country does not have a functioning government. Political parties are locked in argument while many Tunisians suffer from the poor economic situation and the high level of unemployment. Tensions between religious and secular forces in the North African country have also increased in past months. German Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle called on all political sides to return to dialogue and expressed his concern about the situation in the country that was the birthplace of the Arab Spring uprisings. Jebali announced his resignation on Tuesday evening (19.02.2013) after his own Ennahda party had rejected his plan to form a technocrat government. Jebali had hoped that a cabinet of experts not affiliated with any of the political parties would be able to lead the country out of the crisis. Government supporters and opposition activists both take to the streets to make their voices heard The technocrats were supposed to govern in place of the three party collation of Islamist Ennahda, social democratic Ettakatol and the secular Congress for the Republic (CPR) as well as prepare new elections. For Ennahda, however, it was out of the question to accept the plan as it was an idea first fielded by the opposition. "It would have been admitting to failure or at least a crisis," said Hardy Ostry, head of the Tunisia office of Konrad Adenauer Foundation, which is aligned with Germany Christian Democratic Union. Also, the party, the strongest in Tunisia, would then lose its control over central ministries including the Interior, Foreign and Defense ministries, Ostry told DW. No climate for investments Jebali's resignation casts a shadow over the ongoing negotiations between Tunisia and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) in Washington. For two years since the fall of dictator Zine El Abidine Ben Ali, the country still suffers from a serious economic crisis and is in dire need of fresh credit. Rating agency Standard and Poor's has recently downgraded the country yet again. According to Ostry, tourism also suffers from the crisis, "The entire situation is certainly not very positive for the economy." The situation is made worse by the murder of opposition politician Chokri Belaid, earlier in February. Belaid was a sharp critic of the governing Islamists. That's why the opposition believes Ennahda itself was behind the attack. For days, demonstrators protested in the streets and clashed with police. Tunisian political scientist Chokri Hamrouni of the Tunisian Institute for Strategic Studies said in addition to the political, economic and social crisis, there also is a serious security issue in Tunisia. "As a consequence of the killing of Chokri Belaid, many Tunisians are asking themselves in what kind of a security situation they live in," he said, adding that many opposition activists, intellectuals and artists say they experience threats and intimidations on a daily basis. Jebali: the former and future prime minister? The demonstrations have lead to widespread clashes with police and security forces According to Tunisian media, President Moncef Marzouki wanted to meet with Ennahda leader Rachid Ghannouchi to discuss the situation. Political scientist Hamrouni said outgoing Jebali is likely to once again get the job as prime minister and the task of forming a new cabinet. Despite his Ennahda membership, Jebali is accepted by the large majority of the country's political class. In the dispute between whether to go with technocrats or party politicians, there might be a middle path after all. This would be about a broadening of the past coalition to include more politicians and a number of independent experts as well, Hamrouni said. Ostry though did not expect Jebali to be at the helm of the new cabinet. While the now former prime minister signaled he'd be willing to take the job, he also issued some conditions. His demand that all powers could lie with the government could make it particularly difficult for him to return to power. That demand is, according to Ostry, directed against the controversial League to Protect the Revolution, which is seen as very close to Ennahda. Independent of this, Ennahda would aim for a broadening of its current three-party coalition. But this alone would not solve the crisis, said Ostry. "The actual problem is that as soon as possible a new constitution needs to be passed and that there's a date for the next election," he said, adding such a move could restore trust and security and bring investors back into the country. "I believe that the calls for a clear political path are crucial."


Smugglers operate freely in Libya as Europe struggles to act on Mediterranean migration With the EU struggling to take action against risky migration in the Mediterranean, traffickers are using Libya's power vacuum to their advantage. As Marine Olivesi found, while migrants are caught, the smugglers escape. Compass in his hands, Zubeir, a Libyan smuggler, goes over the road map with Abdullah, the co-captain. It's almost midnight, the boat is set to leave in a couple of hours, and Abdullah hasn't much time to get it right: Zubeir won't be with them on board. Abdullah, a fisherman from Senegal, will have to tell the captain, another migrant from Gambia, which direction to go. "You see how the needle is on 20 now?," Zubeir shows Abdullah. "The first three hours, it needs to be on the 17 line." That, roughly, means the boat has to head straight north. Zuara, near the Tunisian border, is Libya's closest point to Lampedusa. It's made the town an attractive departing spot for migrants hoping to reach Europe, and one of Libya's busiest smuggling hubs despite local authorities' insistence that they are actively fighting human trafficking. Salem Abuajeila, an army officer in the local "Ops room," lists stopping people smuggling as a high priority, but complains about not having enough boats, cars and manpower for the task. Meanwhile, he also makes a point to downplay the role locals have in the business. "We have a Libyan saying that says 'whenever you go into a town, you go to that town with its people'," Abuajeila explains from his office just a few streets away from the safe house where Abdullah and dozens of others wait for departure. "In other words," he adds, "smugglers are going to need locals from Zuara to help them get migrants out of Zuara to Europe." Lucrative occupation Like other officials, Abuajeila explains that human trafficking rings stretch well beyond Libya's borders, and that they don't know who the top smugglers are. Under any set of criteria though, Zubeir, the man teaching Abdullah how to use a compass, would qualify. Thousands of migrants are rounded up in Libya, but the smugglers are slipping through the net He broke into the business in 2006 after he encountered five Ghanaians on a beach, who had been washed back to Libyan shores. Connecting migrants to smugglers became a lucrative pastime for the teenager: Zubeir would get a cut for each new "customer" he'd bring. After the Libyan revolution, he moved up the ranks and became a smuggler in his own right, buying vessels and overseeing their departures. Zubeir says he pockets up to 17,600 euros ($20,000) in fares for a boat of 80. While sizable for a single man, his net profit represents a drop in the $170 million generated by Libyan smugglers last year for sea crossings alone according to a recent United Nations report. Other coastal towns have cashed in the business. In Zuara alone, he says at least three dozen smugglers operate like he does, right under the nose of local authorities. "I've never had to hide my job from friends or family," Zubeir says. "It's been absolutely fine." Caught in transit Officially, not a single smuggler has been arrested in Zuara this year. Authorities in Tripoli couldn't confirm any arrests there either, but they happily arrange for us to go see the thousands of people who have been rounded up - none of them Libyans. Nasser Azam is the head of a new unit in charge of illegal migration in Tripoli. He says last month they caught 2,000 undocumented migrants in the span of two weeks alone. Those recently incarcerated have joined the fray of the 25,000 currently in detention across Libya according to estimates. Their crime, Azam says, is to be in the country illegally. But he believes that arresting them ultimately serves a bigger purpose in the fight against human trafficking. "Most of the migrants are only here on transit before they gather enough money to go to Europe," Azam explains. "So by arresting a large number of them, we are also disturbing the smugglers' business. Because now it's more difficult for them to bring in thousands of people and find a place to stay for them until they get on a boat. So we are making their job harder. And we think that if we carry on working that way, it would eventually end the business." Sitting on a former football field under the scorching sun, West Africans in detention like Amine say that's a ludicrous claim. "The problem won't be stopped like that," the man from Senegal says. "Because every single day, I swear, more migrants cross the desert to reach Libya. As I'm speaking right now, some people are making their way from Senegal to Tripoli!" Amine and others say they've been arrested because they're at the bottom of the food chain: they're the most vulnerable, and the easiest to catch. Locking up a few thousand, they say, won't make any difference as long as smugglers are free to continue their job. "You have to fight the matter at the roots," Amine blurts out. "And they are the roots of the problem too! The smugglers are working with the authorities, with those higher up." Smuggling with impunity Outside the prison, a frail, yet heavily pregnant woman from Nigeria who's just been released offers one example why migrants believe smugglers are protected. Mary, who has been in the country for more than a year, was snatched in a nightly raid last month with her husband in an apartment where the couple had been staying. With spring time and the opening of the smuggling season, she says a lot of people suddenly started coming and going. "Migrants would come, stay there for a week or so and then we would never see them again." Her landlord, she says, was running a safe house, the place where migrants would lay low before heading to Europe. "Last month, the money she collects, it's not for the rent. It was much more than that. This money is for 'pushing'," Mary says, referring to the act of sending migrants at sea. Yet the night when she and others were arrested, Azam's unit only grabbed migrants. The landlord is still free, she says. Stories like that one have Mary and others convinced the authorities are turning a blind eye to the Libyans complicit in the trade. Authorities divided Azam, the head of the new task force in charge of illegal migration in the capital, admits that fighting the big criminals would be a very different challenge. "These smuggling rings, they're like big gangs," he says. "They're not individual Libyans only. It's difficult to look into these things, especially since we've been at it only for a few weeks." The coast guard in Misrata manages to catch only a handful of the Europe-bound vessels Later on, one of his subordinate jokes: attacking the Libyans involved in trafficking would trigger a civil war. It's an odd comment considering there's already a civil war going on in Libya, but it also underlines a central dilemma for the authorities. Forces aligned with the Tripoli-based government are stretched thin between a fight against the Islamic State in Sirte, and the year-long battle against the internationally-recognized government sitting in the east. In that context, confronting smugglers operating in their midst and dismantling their networks would open yet another front, and further weaken their own forces. Several officials hinted that's something they just can't afford. "All the efforts Libyan authorities are making in fighting people smuggling right now are painkillers," says in Misrata Col. Reda Essa, who commands the main coast guard force in West Libya. "It's not dealing with the problem itself, but at this point we can't handle it on our own." Essa's job these days is like emptying water from a sinking ship. The coast guards on patrol stopped eight rubber dinghies and one wooden boat at sea in the past few weeks - a tiny fraction of the vessels which departed from Libya's shores during that time. According to updated figures from the International Organization for Migration, more than 58,000 migrants have reached Italy this year and 1,819 died along the way, making the Libya-Italy smuggling route the busiest, and by far deadliest, in the Mediterranean. Nowhere but north Lacina says he'll try again to get to Europe, even if he's sent back home first The few hundred migrants caught in Libyan waters by Essa's crew ended up at a school outside of Misrata that was turned into a detention center. Behind the locked wooden doors, Lacina, from Ivory Coast, waits his turn for the bathroom. He has been lingering in a classroom since early May. Now that he's reached a dead-end, Lacina wants to be sent back to his home country, or anywhere else in West Africa. He says he already knows what he'll do next: come back to Libya, and try again. And like so many others, he has no doubts there will still be smugglers here ready to help him reach his dream destination.


Tunisia's long, difficult path to a new constitution Tunisia was the first Arab Spring country and it could become the first Arab Spring country to adopt a democratic constitution. But negotiations between secularists and Islamists have taken a toll on the country. The new Tunisian constitution should have been ready months ago - it was due to be finalized in October 2012. It would have paved the way for parliamentary and presidential elections the entire country had been waiting for. But secular and Islamist parties and groups are still debating the constitution's text and have currently drafted a third version. It has been approved by several committees, but the document is still considered controversial. The key point of disagreement centers on how Islamist the Tunisian constitution should be. According to renowned Tunisian expert on constitutional law, Yadh Ben Achour, the draft "clears the way for a religious dictatorship" and leaves "too much room for dangerous interpretations that could conflict with liberal spirits of a revolutionary constitution." Broken promises The fight over the new constitution is the fight over the country's political and societal model. Tunisia is deeply divided between a strong Islamist and a weaker secular movement. Will gender equality rights be part of Tunisia's new constitution? Discussions look at fundamental values and how they are incorporated into the new constitution: Is the commitment to universal human rights tied to cultural characteristics of Tunisian people - as it was expressed in one of the drafts? Is gender equality - including family to inheritance law - guaranteed? Is religion protected? What about freedom of religion? Nothing has been finalized yet in regard to these questions. "In fact, all parties had argued for equal rights during last year's elections, but no one wants to see that laid out in the constitution now," said Lobna Jribi, a member of secular Ettakol party that's part of the national assembly tasked with drafting the constitution. Haunting past But Islamist ruling party Ennahda has a comfortable majority of 136 out of 217 seats in the assembly - the constitution will need to be approved by two thirds of the assembly in order to pass. Ennahda works towards a stronger linkage between religion and government. Large sections of society agree on Ennahda's take. Separation of government and religion, some sort of gender equality - that's what Tunisians had when dictator Zine El-Abidine Ben Ali was in power. But that's exactly the reason why secular ideas have lost credibility for some in Tunisia: They associate these ideas with a dishonest and corrupt dictatorship. Jribi said people need to differentiate more, "We value the civil character of the state; Tunisia is not a pure secularist nor a theocratic state." That means protecting the right to practice religion but not using religion as the basis for judicial or political order, she added. To what extent can religion be incorporated in the new constitution? "Of course there is a strong official state religion which the constitution refers to and which will be taught and protected by the state," Jribi said. "The state is responsible for protecting houses of prayer. The state protects and takes responsibility for imams and their sermons. It also needs to watch that their sermons are in line with the moderate Islam that has been practiced in Tunisia for centuries." The latter has not been taken care of yet. With funds from Qatar and Saudi Arabia, radical imams and organizations have come to Tunisia after the revolution - they push for a Wahabi Islam model for politics and society. They win the hearts and minds of a disenchanted young generation in Tunisia's mosques - the young generation has been waiting to improve its future after Ben Ali's dictatorship ended, but to no avail. No clear European stance Both German and European foreign policies have not been well considered, said Hertha Däubler-Gmelin, a former German justice minister. Europe does not get involved too much, and doesn't have a clear stance and no joint position, she told DW. "Criticism directed at us is justified: Why aren't we supporting secular forces more in states undergoing transformation more decisively?" Tunisia's national assembly will decide on the new constitution While secular forces wait for support they often don't receive, Islamists and other extremists can count on money and support from Arab countries. "That's not only the case for Northern Africa, but also for Yemen, where we have seen a similar approach to exert influence," Däubler-Gmelin said. "From my point of view it's time that the EU and Germany rethink to whom we continue to sell weapons to." In 2012, Germany delivered arms and munitions worth 1.42 billion euros ($1.84 billion) to Gulf States - including Qatar and Saudi Arabia. Media regularly report on Saudi Arabia's interest for German Leopard 2 tanks, wheeled Boxer tanks and patrol boats. Fighting Salafists And the violent Salafist milieu beyond political Islamists is on the rise as well. In mid-May, supporters of the al Qaeda-linked Salafist movement Ansar al-Sharia clashed with security forces where one person was killed and 18 were injured. The government had to act and leave behind its lenient approach to radical and violent Islamists. Prime Minister Ali Larayedh promised to take a hard stance towards Islamists. Tunis saw clashes between salafists and police in mid-May "Ansar al-Sharia is an illegal organization which defies and provokes state authority," Larayedh said in a reaction to the clashes. "Those found to have been involved in violating the law will be prosecuted." Some 200 alleged extremists were arrested. Time is almost up This crackdown was an important step for Jribi and the secular opposition. "It's very important and very positive that the government and security authorities took on their role in recent events and stayed on course," she said. "The state institutions, police and security forces, have gained trust, and presented themselves as capable to act in a neutral manner." The most recent, third draft of the constitution is scheduled to be approved by the national assembly in July 2013. Meanwhile, tension is growing within the assembly. None of the social problems that existed before the revolution has been tackled so far. The official unemployment rate hovers at around 17 percent, but hardly any young Tunisian has the chance to score a regular job at the moment. "We run the risk that our society turns its back on politics," activists such as Islamic scholar Amel Grami have said.


Tunisia deports Libya's ex-prime minister The man who served as Libya's prime minister under Gadhafi is being extradited from Tunisia back to his country after months of uncertainty. Meanwhile, violence has returned to Benghazi. Tunisia's justice minister, Noureddine Bouheiri, on Tuesday announced his country's decision to extradite former Libyan prime minister Baghdadi al-Mahmoudi, who has been detained in Tunisia since his arrest last September. "The government has decided to hand over Mahmoudi and all that remains is the completion of some organizational issues," said Bouheiri. "[The handover] could be within days or weeks or perhaps longer ... Our Libyan brothers have pledged to respect Mahmoudi physically and emotionally and to give him a fair trial," Bouheiri added. Although charges against al-Mahmoudi of illegally entering Tunisia were dropped, he has remained in prison since last year, awaiting a decision on his extradition to Libya. A Tunisian court in November ruled in favor of extradition, but Tunisian President Moncef al-Marzouki later said that this could not happen until the former prime minister could be guaranteed a fair trial in a more stable Libya. Al-Mahmoudi was a key and longstanding figure within the inner political circle of Moammar Gadhafi, who ruled the country until he was overthrown and killed in the revolt that gripped the country last year. Another wave of violence Meanwhile, in a fresh round of violence, a rocket-propelled grenade on Tuesday hit the offices of the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) in Benghazi, the Libyan city that gave birth to the country's recent revolution, according to the organization's spokesperson. "The premises of our delegation were hit by an RPG rocket but there were no casualties," said Soaad Messudi. Thirty-five international and local staff members normally work at the targeted building, which is located in the western part of Benghazi. The ICRC has been working on the ground in Libya since the uprising against Gadhafi first exploded in February 2011, according to Messudi. The ICRC has maintained a neutral stance while undertaking humanitarian operations there ever since. A branch of the Sahara Bank was also hit by a rocket attack in Benghazi on the same day, although there were no injuries, witnesses said. The attacks mark a continuation of a pattern of violence in Benghazi in recent months. In April a courthouse was bombed, causing damage to the building and wounding four people. sej/ncy (AP, AFP, Reuters)


Mayada Shili, Tunisia The radio journalist from Tunisia took part in DW Akademie's journalism training in Tunis. Describe Tunisia's current media landscape following all the changes. It's still in the midst of change and facing many challenges. Apart from transparency and proving professionalism, the media first and foremost have to regain the confidence of the people and make sure that media independence is guaranteed. It's a daily struggle and not an easy one, but I think we’re on the right track.  How did you experience the revolution? It was an extraordinary time for me as a citizen. After years of silence the people spoke out and accomplished what the elite class had been unable to do: they overthrew the dictator. There was hope and there was relief, but it was also an extremely difficult period. We were afraid because we didn't know what the uprising would lead to. What we feared most was that people had perhaps sacrificed their lives for nothing. As a journalist, it was an extremely difficult time. The worst period, at least for me, was from January 10 -14, 2011 because my colleagues and I felt useless. There was bloodshed on the streets and we couldn't do anything. All that week I just played music, and all I could do was to make sure that the music spoke for itself. All my programs had been cancelled and taken off air.  What has changed for you in terms of your professional and personal life? On a professional level I can say that I've blossomed. Before that it was just the opposite. I'd spent time studying at a renowned university, and even though I wasn't majoring in journalism I felt very attracted to the communication industry. That's why I chose to work in radio but I became more and more frustrated because I could see that it was leading nowhere. There was no perspective of change at all. Today I'm happy with my work, I feel useful, I'm doing real journalism, and the world is opening up to me. I've done lots of things in just two years - participating in international media conferences, attending workshops, conducting extensive ground research and I've even been a finalist for a prestigious journalism award. In my personal life I'm also very happy because my professional success is obviously a source of joy and motivates me to do better. I've got lots of plans and goals, and a great determination to succeed.  What issues do you cover? All topics that interest Tunisian people in this difficult transitional period that we're currently going through. Today most Tunisian media are focusing on political issues.   How do you think the international media is covering Tunisian issues? What issues need more in-depth coverage? Tunisia sparked the Arab Spring but it's also the country that's received the least coverage. It's true that Tunisia is comparatively well off but what's happening here is worrying, even though it's less severe than what's happening in Egypt, Syria or Libya. But we have to draw attention to certain threats to freedom and security rather than focusing on individual cases and amplifying problems that don't exist. And that happens sometimes.  What is the most important challenge facing journalists? Defending a fundamental human right: freedom of the press.  What are you learning at the DW Akademie workshops? Choosing topics and how to go about researching and producing them, how to go live on air, how to work with limited resources, and for me particularly: how to stay focused on a topic. I had a tendency to drop a subject if I didn't get a positive response. That's not the case anymore. I follow through and try to get by with the means I have at my disposal.


Religion's political role expands in Tunisia Many in Tunisia fear that religious radicals are gaining too much influence over the country's political discourse. The governing Ennahda party, however, has to find a way to appeal to both secularists and Islamists. "No to coups! Yes to elections!" was the chant blasting out of loudspeakers at the Place de la Kasbah in the Tunisian capital, Tunis, last Saturday. More than 200,000 people participated in the demonstration to show their support for the ruling transitional government, according to Najib Gharbi, a spokesperson for the Ennahda party, which has the most seats in parliament. The demonstration was a response to anti-government protests that have been taking place in Tunisia over the last two weeks. Since the murder of opposition politician Mohamed Brahmi on July 25, a year-and-a-half's worth of pent-up disappointment and anger has exploded into massive protests. One of the protesters' key demands is dissolution of the government and the constitutional assembly, which had been tasked with drafting a new constitution. The government coalition, made up of the moderate Islamic Ennahda party with the secular Ettakatol Party and the center-left CPR as junior partners, has not been able to provide stability or generate an economic upswing in the country, while the constitutional assembly has not been able to fulfill its key task, demonstrators claimed. A draft constitution was originally supposed to be announced by October 2012. Both the government Cabinet and the constitutional assembly are dominated by Ennahda party members. Government critics have also called for an inquiry into the murder of Brahmi, as well as of Chokri Belaid, a second murdered opposition politician. In late July, the Interior Ministry announced it has a suspect: Bouabaker el-Hakim, an alleged radical Salafist born in France. Protests have been going for weeks in Tunis 'Ennahda is betraying Islam' The growing influence of Salafists poses a challenge to the Ennahda movement under Rachid Ghannouchi, who returned to Tunisia from exile in 2011. Officially, Ennahda denies ties to Salafists, and in May the government took a hard line against the Salafist group Ansar al-Shariah. But contact between moderate and radical Islamic wings are still suspected to exist in Tunisia - a prospect the secular opposition is not willing to accept. At the same time, however, Ennahda's popularity is falling among some Salafists. "The party is only interested in political power, that is why it governs with secularists," said Walid, a family man who proudly declared himself a Salafist. The secularists include any parties that promote a separation of state and religion, he added. "Ennahda is betraying Islam," Wahid said. Ennahda's willingness to cooperate with secular parties also goes too far for Ansar al-Shariah. It will join forces with al Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM) to fight the "partisans of secularism," said Ansar al-Shariah spokesperson Mohamed Anis Chaieb in March. Ennahda party members have demonstrated some flexibility in drafting the country's new constitution. In August 2012, it proposed a constitutional article describing women as "complementary" to men, and did not mention gender equality. Women's rights activists took to the streets and pressured Ennahda to withdrawal the article. The party also decided not to imbed Islamic law in the constitution after a debate with opposition groups. Women are concerned about their rights under religious government Religion: the new red line But these steps have not been enough to clear up many Tunisians' doubts about Ennahda. Mériem Bourguiba-Laouiti, granddaughter of former President Habib Bourguiba, said she knows one of the reasons why: "Women feel threatened by Ennahda because they fear for their rights." Houcine Tlili, an art historian and university instructor, is also concerned: "The Islamists create an atmosphere of fear. Galleries close, artists are threatened. But mainly it's our youth who are fighting against the Islamists' anti-democratic current." And the Ennahda's judiciary branch has been paying close attention. Blogger Jabeur Mejri was sentenced to seven years in prison for "insulting religion" in 2012 after he published a caricature of the Prophet Muhammad on the Internet. Journalist and television host Hamza Belloumi said he sees an increasing amount of self-censorship in Tunisia. "Religion is the new red line that no one dares approach," he added. Religion's growing role For engineer Seif Katri, the current protests are more than a confrontation between the government's supporters and opponents. It's the political role of Islam that splits Tunisia, he said. "The religious are on one side and the secularists are on the other," he added. As a practicing Muslim, Katri said he was concerned about the country's short-term future. "Particularly at the beginning of democracy, extremes are very dangerous," he said, adding that he did not participate in demonstrations for or against the government. "During the revolution [that ousted dictator Zine El Abidine Ben Ali] in 2011, all Tunisians united and took to the streets. It did not matter if individuals were religious or secular." But Katri thinks that situation has changed.


'It was a good day for Tunisia,' says chief EU election observer Tunisia was the first Arab nation to hold free elections after ousting its authoritarian ruler in the wake of this year's popular uprisings. The head of the EU observation team believes the polls sent a powerful signal. Michael Gahler is a conservative German MEP, who heads the EU's election observation mission in Tunisia. He has been a member of the European Parliament since 1999 and now works on its Foreign Affairs Committee, amongst others. Deutsche Welle: More than 90 percent of the 4.1 million registered voters turned out to vote. Have Tunisia's first free elections been free and fair? Michael Gahler: It is a joyous occasion. We spoke with people who stood in line for hours and they were all happy. And for most of them it's the first time that they have participated in an election - they never took part in one of Ben Ali's sham elections. It's a good day for Tunisia. We as election observers are currently in the process of counting the ballots because that is the decisive point in the political discussion in Tunisia: Are the elections transparent? Transparent means until the last moment, from the determination of the result at the polling station to the total result in the electoral district. There have been some delays because the turnout was so large in the electoral districts, where those who had been pre-registered voted. In addition, there have been a few small irregularities because records of the results were sealed and stuck in the ballot boxes. That's actually not supposed to happen, but those are beginner's mistakes. They don't have a negative impact on the quality of the election, but they do delay the process of counting the votes. Has there also been talk of electoral fraud? There was a lot of fear of that. I believe that the system, as it is currently set up, is very transparent. The election results were shown outside the polling stations so that they could be seen by every Tunisian. Observers were there every step of the way. I have been convinced that for example in the electoral district 'Tunis 1' all the records of the elections results came in and were tabulated under observation. In the end, the results from every individual polling station will be put on the internet. In that way, you can really talk about transparency and that no fraud took place in the process. Minor irregularities should not affect the quality of the vote, Gahler says  How does the process continue once the votes have been counted? Initially, the distribution of seats will be determined. There were also districts where more than one representative was chosen. Between four and 10 seats have been determined in the 27 domestic electoral districts and six have been determined in the districts abroad. There was also voting in Germany. This distribution will be made public on Tuesday evening by the head of the electoral commission. What signal does the execution and end result of the election send to other Arab countries? I think it sends a very strong and convincing signal. People who have liberated themselves from authoritarianism have managed to create a legitimate framework for their leadership within a good nine months. The election was prepared independent of the existing structures, and it was not necessary to rely on the existing electoral structures. The Tunisians wanted to separate themselves from the people who stand for the old era. There are people in the electoral commission who championed democracy and even returned from exile to help put Tunisia's democracy on its feet. And that sends a very clear signal to other Arab countries: If you want to have not just a revolution, but also a sustainable democratic framework, then organize yourselves like the Tunisians. Will the Tunisians as well as the West accept the results of these free elections regardless of how they come out in the end? It is not just about whether we election observers accept the result. The Tunisians must feel that the result on Tuesday is their result. And if that is the case, then not only does the constitutional assembly have to be carried out on this basis, but it is also the task of the West, the neighboring countries here and also the international community to continue working with Tunisia on this foundation in order to consolidate democracy. Interview: Diana Hodali / slk Editor: Nicole Goebel


Femen: Fighting the 'feminist Spring' in the Arab world Members of the breast-baring feminist movement Femen say they are fighting the patriarchy. One of their latest ideas is to launch a "feminist spring" in the Arab-Muslim world, but it's been causing outrage and arrest. Pauline Hillier looks tired as she greets a visitor to Femen's Paris headquarters. That's understandable. She's just been released from police custody after trying, unsuccessfully, to demonstrate in front of the Elysee presidential palace. The 26-year-old wears a flimsy white coverall over Femen's trademark battle fatigues - underwear…and not much else.  "It was really surprising because we got out of the car to start our protest and as soon as they saw our flower crowns, the policeman started to run at us, to arrest us. It was really quick. So, as they caught us, we didn't want to stop our protest, of course, we had a message to deliver. So we just kept fighting and continued our protest as we always do."  Hillier's latest brush with the law was pretty mild; at least compared to the previous one. She recently spent one month in a Tunisian jail, for staging a topless protest in support of imprisoned Femen colleague, Amina Sboui. Words like "feminist Jihad" and "feminist spring" have caused outrage in the Muslim world Internet videos show Hillier and two other European Femen members, one French and one German, demonstrating before a crowd of photographers and angry people in front of the Tunis courthouse. One man tries to throw a coat over the women, who have graffiti painted on their chests. Seconds later, plainclothes police haul them away.  "They threw hot coffee on us. We thought it was acid. We were really scared, but we continued. Then they tried to hide us, because of course, they cannot stand boobs [in public], it's [just] not possible. They insulted us, they pointed guns at us, then they put us in a dark room and they insulted us again…I remember one women [wearing] a niqab - she punched me in the face."  Femen's bare-breasted battles for women's rights are quickly making the feminist movement a household name. Femen women have stripped down to their underwear to protest sex tourism, religious institutions, autocracy and, of course, chauvinism. The response has been outrage, amusement and, sometimes, support. Fire at Femen HQ Last year, Femen opened a European training camp in Paris, to prepare a new generation of young feminists for battle. The HQ was the site of a fire on Sunday (21.07.13) although the cause is yet to be determined, and is being treated as an "accident" by police. The Femen HQ in Paris was the site of a fire on Saturday The Femen group reportedly said it was a strange coincidence since earlier in the week, they had received a phone message saying they should "burn" like "witches". Hillier herself is said to have been present in the building, although not hurt, as some members of the group sleep on the upper floors. Punching the air as she speaks, Hillier demonstrates what goes on at their training sessions. "Usually, we are like 20 [training]. We run, we do physical preparation, like pushups [to make sure we are in shape]. But also we prepare scenarios like how to strip quickly, how to attack a politician, for example, or how to jump on a car or how to climb stairs, stuff like that."  The 'feminist spring' Femen's latest target is Islam. Inna Shevchenko, the Ukrainian head of Femen's Paris branch, who has just gained asylum in France, says Tunisia is only the start of a larger campaign for women's rights in Muslim countries. She calls it a new "Arab spring" for women. "Countries of [the] Arab Spring were a big disappointment for society, but also with the changing political situation - and Islamist parties which are leading governments, in Tunisia as well - they are trying to increase the levels of oppression." Inna Shevchenko has won asylum in Paris "We staged our topless protests saying there will be a second revolution, there will be a women's spring, there will be a women's revolution." Tunisia was the launchpad for the wider 2011 Arab uprisings. It has long been hailed as a regional leader when it comes to women's rights. But today, rights activists like Khadija Cherif fear the rising clout of Islamists is rolling back women's gains - and free expression in general. Right message, wrong methods? Cherif says the harsh treatment of Femen activist Sboui is a case in point. She may not agree with her methods, but she doesn't agree with her harsh treatment either.  "What is happening today is serious. Because this young woman who bared her breasts…just because she painted graffiti on a wall, she finds herself in prison." "Even if, for me, [what she did] is not the best way to defend women's rights, it doesn't put anybody in danger. "  For Femen, Sboui was a sister in trouble. The women had to defend her, Hillier says, even if it meant following her to prison, so they headed to Tunisia, and ended up in custody.  "We shared a room with many girls. It was hot inside, with those bugs, cockroaches. Food is only once a day. We only had one shower in a month. There is not one bed per person - we were humiliated."  'Muslim women against Femen' Permalink http://p.dw.com/p/19A8Z Femen's tactics are also questioned in the ethnically diverse working class Paris neighborhood where it is based. At a nearby cafe, Algerian Said Kana is ambivalent about the movement.  "I support free expression, but there are limits. You can't undress in certain places."  Nearby, a Muslim hardware store clerk who calls himself Momo says Femen has "no decency." But, ignoring those criticisms, Hillier argues Femen is winning new supporters, both in Paris and abroad. She says many young Tunisians now support Femen on Facebook. So do the female inmates she spent time with in the Tunisian prison.  Fighting the patriarchy "We had time to discuss with them, even though they were really religious women, but they were starting to criticize [the] government and to complain [about] why women are in jail and the repression in Tunisia. So they are daring to be pissed [off] and to say it out loud, not to keep it for themselves."  Hillier and her European colleagues were released at the end of June. But Tunisian activist Sboui remains in jail, as she awaits trial on charges of desecration and indecency. So Femen's battle continues - in Tunisia and elsewhere.  "Something is rising. I think there is a new energy with Femen. Many girls want to join, many branches are opening …not only in North Africa or Muslim countries, also [in] Spain, Canada, Poland, many many countries."  Undeterred, Hillier says it's just the beginning of Femen. The movement will continue, she and other Femen members say, until patriarchy is dead.


Fatwa death edicts prompt Egypt to boost security for opposition Security has been stepped up around leading opposition figures in Egypt after hardline Muslim clerics called for them to be killed. The Islamist government has condemned the so-called "fatwas." Egyptian Interior Minister Mohammed Ibrahim on Thursday issued the order for police to deploy extra security at the homes of prominent opposition members. Prime Minister Hesham Kandil warned that the religious edicts -also known as fatwas - could result in "sedition and disturbance." "These extremist edicts are not related to Islam," the state news agency reported Kandil as saying. "The Egyptian people had a glorious January Revolution for the sake of establishing a democratic society where dialogue prevails, not killing." The fatwas came in response to recent violence that followed National Salvation Front (NSF) calls for protest against President Mohammed Morsi and his Islamist Muslim Brotherhood. The opposition accuses Morsi of trying to monopolize power. Speaking on the religious television channel Al-Hafez, prominent radical cleric, Mahud Shabaan, accused NSF leaders of "setting Egypt on fire to gain power. The verdict against them under God's law is death,” he said. The cleric mentioned by name two well-known Front leaders: leading dissident and the former head of the United Nations' nuclear watchdog agency, Mohamed ElBaradei (pictured second from left), and former presidential candidate Hamdeen Sabahi (pictured third from left). Another hardline religious leader, Wagdi Ghoneim, issued a video declaring that, if the government didn't act against the opposition, private citizens would. "We will kill the criminals, the thugs, the thieves and those who give them money and those who help them with words. No mercy with them," Ghoneim loudly declared. The security order came a day after the assassination of Tunisian opposition leader Chokri Belaid, who was gunned down outside his home in the capital, Tunis. Belaid's family claim the killing was carried out by Islamists. rc/pfd (AFP, AP, dpa, Reuters)


Tunisia: “The old notions won’t survive” In Tunisia, too, changes have been happening very fast over the last several weeks. DW Akademie project manager and project coordinator for North Africa, Michael Tecklenburg, talks about the media situation in Tunisia. Why is it so important to support the media in Tunisia right now? After the revolution at the beginning of the year journalists told us they were in a kind of vacuum. During the revolution our Tunisian colleagues went out and for the first time reported live. That was a turning point for the media there - to go out and record people live without censoring them. After a while, though, they realized that they were lacking certain skills. For 25 years journalism didn't really exist. They simply held out a microphone to those in power and recorded them, but never in a journalistic sense with viewers or listeners in mind.   What are DW Akademie's plans in Tunisia? Right now we're focusing on the elections scheduled for July 24th. In May we'll start with a workshop series on election reporting for radio journalists. It's important for our colleagues to learn how to step out of the role of the microphone holder and to report professionally on the goals of the individual political parties and candidates. That will be followed by training for television editors. We’re also planning workshops that look not just at journalistic skills but also at how to approach specific topics in a target-oriented way. In the final analysis, this is all to support the Tunisian democratization process. It's important to remember that Tunisian society is in transition and that an entirely new political culture is emerging.   How were you able to get an overview of the media landscape and to find partners to work with in the future? We went from station to station and spoke with those in charge. At the end of February we also held a workshop in Tunis together with the Friedrich Ebert Foundation. High-ranking participants attended - representatives from the state-controlled and private media as well as from civil society - in other words various key figures from the Tunisian media world. Jointly they developed the minimum requirements which the state has to secure in the constitution so that the media can report freely and independently. These are things that we as journalists take for granted in a Western democracy. We're also in contact with the state-controlled broadcasting corporation. If this is to be restructured and become a public broadcaster, we'll stand by them as consultants.   After a political overthrow of this kind should DW Akademie not be distancing itself from the state-controlled broadcaster? I'm sure there are still people working there who represented the former regime, just as there are people there who want to reform the structure. At the same time, one has to remember that even the private stations which were licensed during the Ben Ali era were not free and independent. If they had been, they wouldn't have received their broadcasting licenses. The daughter of the overthrown president Ben Ali was still conducting business in one of the stations and went in and out on a daily basis back in March. That means we need to look closely at each station and decide how strong the desire for change is. There can be situations where we might not be able to get past the supporters of the old regime. But if they were all fired, there could be a vacuum in the administration structure for example, making it difficult to continue working at all. What makes me optimistic is that Tunisia has a very young population. There's a strong desire for change. The old notions won't survive in the long run.   The problems in the Middle East and North Africa are similar. Is DW Akademie reacting with similar projects? To some extent they are very different countries with very different development patterns. There have, of course, been revolutions and there will be elections, but the results can vary from country to country. We won't be working with the same concepts throughout the region. One of DW Akademie's strengths is that we say: "We will help, but the partners have to say what it is they want and what it is they need." Then we can react accordingly. That’s why DW Akademie's work in Tunisia or Morocco is different than our work in Egypt, Yemen or Syria.


French foreign minister quits after Tunisia gaffes French Foreign Minister Michele Alliot-Marie presented her resignation in a letter to President Sarkozy on Sunday following a series of blunders over the popular uprising in Tunisia. French Foreign Minister Michele Alliot-Marie reportedly presented her resignation to French President Nicolas Sarkozy on Sunday just three months after she took that post in the last government shuffle. "While I do not feel that I have committed any wrongdoing, I have...decided to leave my job as foreign minister," Alliot-Marie wrote in her resignation letter to President Nicolas Sarkozy following a series of diplomatic blunders in connection with Tunisia. Sarkozy announced that Defense Minister Alain Juppe would take over from Alliot-Marie in a short televised speech on Sunday evening, without mentioning the minister herself. Contacts with former Tunisian regime Alliot-Marie sparked controversy when she said France could help Tunisia to quash protests that led to the fall of the Tunisian government. Only days before the regime fell in January's "Jasmine Revolution," she suggested that French security experts could help train Tunisian riot police to control the popular uprising. Her position became increasingly untenable when it was revealed that she had taken a holiday in the former French colony at the time of the popular uprisings.  Alliot-Marie suggested France could help train Tunisian police For the December vacation, Alliot-Marie had used the private jet of a businessman linked to the Ben Ali regime from whom her parents also bought stakes in a company. Criticism from newspapers, diplomats Opposition politicians demanded that Alliot-Marie resign and the politician also faced criticism from French newspapers over perceived "lies" and "untruths." French foreign policy on the North African uprisings was even met with criticism from unnamed diplomats who published an open letter accusing the government of "amateurism" and "impulsiveness" in the French daily newspaper Le Monde. Former Ambassador Jean-Christophe Rufin on Sunday criticised the "damage" done to France's image. Gerard Longuet, the leader of Sarkozy's center-right party in the French Senate, will replace Juppe as defense minister. The president’s chief of staff Claude Gueant will swap places with Interior Minister Brice Hortefeux. Author: Richard Connor (AFP, Reuters) Editor: Sonia Phalnikar


Tunisia: “The old notions won’t survive” In Tunisia, too, changes have been happening very fast over the last several weeks. DW-AKADEMIE project manager and project coordinator for North Africa, Michael Tecklenburg, talks about the media situation in Tunisia. Why is it so important to support the media in Tunisia right now?


After the revolution at the beginning of the year journalists told us they were in a kind of vacuum. During the revolution our Tunisian colleagues went out and for the first time reported live. That was a turning point for the media there – to go out and record people live without censoring them. After a while, though, they realized that they were lacking certain skills. For 25 years journalism didn’t really exist. They simply held out a microphone to those in power and recorded them, but never in a journalistic sense with viewers or listeners in mind. 

What are DW-AKADEMIE’s plans in Tunisia?

Right now we’re focusing on the elections scheduled for July 24th. In May we’ll start with a workshop series on election reporting for radio journalists. It’s important for our colleagues to learn how to step out of the role of the microphone holder and to report professionally on the goals of the individual political parties and candidates. That will be followed by training for television editors. We’re also planning workshops that look not just at journalistic skills but also at how to approach specific topics in a target-oriented way. In the final analysis, this is all to support the Tunisian democratization process. It’s important to remember that Tunisian society is in transition and that an entirely new political culture is emerging. 

How were you able to get an overview of the media landscape and to find partners to work with in the future?

We went from station to station and spoke with those in charge. At the end of February we also held a workshop in Tunis together with the Friedrich Ebert Foundation. High-ranking participants attended – representatives from the state-controlled and private media as well as from civil society – in other words various key figures from the Tunisian media world. Jointly they developed the minimum requirements which the state has to secure in the constitution so that the media can report freely and independently. These are things that we as journalists take for granted in a Western democracy. We’re also in contact with the state-controlled broadcasting corporation. If this is to be restructured and become a public broadcaster, we’ll stand by them as consultants.



After a political overthrow of this kind should DW-AKADEMIE not be distancing itself from the state-controlled broadcaster?

I’m sure there are still people working there who represented the former regime, just as there are people there who want to reform the structure. At the same time, one has to remember that even the private stations which were licensed during the Ben Ali era were not free and independent. If they had been, they wouldn’t have received their broadcasting licenses. The daughter of the overthrown president Ben Ali was still conducting business in one of the stations and went in and out on a daily basis back in March. That means we need to look closely at each station and decide how strong the desire for change is. There can be situations where we might not be able to get past the supporters of the old regime. But if they were all fired, there could be a vacuum in the administration structure for example, making it difficult to continue working at all. What makes me optimistic is that Tunisia has a very young population. There’s a strong desire for change. The old notions won’t survive in the long run. 

The problems in the Middle East and North Africa are similar. Is DW-AKADEMIE reacting with similar projects?

To some extent they are very different countries with very different development patterns. There have, of course, been revolutions and there will be elections, but the results can vary from country to country. We won’t be working with the same concepts throughout the region. One of DW-AKADEMIE’s strengths is that we say ‘We will help, but the partners have to say what it is they want and what it is they need.’ Then we can react accordingly. That’s why DW-AKADEMIE’s work in Tunisia or Morocco is different than our work in Egypt, Yemen or Syria. What are DW-AKADEMIE’s plans in Tunisia?

Right now we’re focusing on the elections scheduled for July 24th. In May we’ll start with a workshop series on election reporting for radio journalists. It’s important for our colleagues to learn how to step out of the role of the microphone holder and to report professionally on the goals of the individual political parties and candidates. That will be followed by training for television editors. We’re also planning workshops that look not just at journalistic skills but also at how to approach specific topics in a target-oriented way. In the final analysis, this is all to support the Tunisian democratization process. It’s important to remember that Tunisian society is in transition and that an entirely new political culture is emerging. 

How were you able to get an overview of the media landscape and to find partners to work with in the future?

We went from station to station and spoke with those in charge. At the end of February we also held a workshop in Tunis together with the Friedrich Ebert Foundation. High-ranking participants attended – representatives from the state-controlled and private media as well as from civil society – in other words various key figures from the Tunisian media world. Jointly they developed the minimum requirements which the state has to secure in the constitution so that the media can report freely and independently. These are things that we as journalists take for granted in a Western democracy. We’re also in contact with the state-controlled broadcasting corporation. If this is to be restructured and become a public broadcaster, we’ll stand by them as consultants.



After a political overthrow of this kind should DW-AKADEMIE not be distancing itself from the state-controlled broadcaster?

I’m sure there are still people working there who represented the former regime, just as there are people there who want to reform the structure. At the same time, one has to remember that even the private stations which were licensed during the Ben Ali era were not free and independent. If they had been, they wouldn’t have received their broadcasting licenses. The daughter of the overthrown president Ben Ali was still conducting business in one of the stations and went in and out on a daily basis back in March. That means we need to look closely at each station and decide how strong the desire for change is. There can be situations where we might not be able to get past the supporters of the old regime. But if they were all fired, there could be a vacuum in the administration structure for example, making it difficult to continue working at all. What makes me optimistic is that Tunisia has a very young population. There’s a strong desire for change. The old notions won’t survive in the long run. 

The problems in the Middle East and North Africa are similar. Is DW-AKADEMIE reacting with similar projects?

To some extent they are very different countries with very different development patterns. There have, of course, been revolutions and there will be elections, but the results can vary from country to country. We won’t be working with the same concepts throughout the region. One of DW-AKADEMIE’s strengths is that we say ‘We will help, but the partners have to say what it is they want and what it is they need.’ Then we can react accordingly. That’s why DW-AKADEMIE’s work in Tunisia or Morocco is different than our work in Egypt, Yemen or Syria. How were you able to get an overview of the media landscape and to find partners to work with in the future?

We went from station to station and spoke with those in charge. At the end of February we also held a workshop in Tunis together with the Friedrich Ebert Foundation. High-ranking participants attended – representatives from the state-controlled and private media as well as from civil society – in other words various key figures from the Tunisian media world. Jointly they developed the minimum requirements which the state has to secure in the constitution so that the media can report freely and independently. These are things that we as journalists take for granted in a Western democracy. We’re also in contact with the state-controlled broadcasting corporation. If this is to be restructured and become a public broadcaster, we’ll stand by them as consultants.



After a political overthrow of this kind should DW-AKADEMIE not be distancing itself from the state-controlled broadcaster?

I’m sure there are still people working there who represented the former regime, just as there are people there who want to reform the structure. At the same time, one has to remember that even the private stations which were licensed during the Ben Ali era were not free and independent. If they had been, they wouldn’t have received their broadcasting licenses. The daughter of the overthrown president Ben Ali was still conducting business in one of the stations and went in and out on a daily basis back in March. That means we need to look closely at each station and decide how strong the desire for change is. There can be situations where we might not be able to get past the supporters of the old regime. But if they were all fired, there could be a vacuum in the administration structure for example, making it difficult to continue working at all. What makes me optimistic is that Tunisia has a very young population. There’s a strong desire for change. The old notions won’t survive in the long run. 

The problems in the Middle East and North Africa are similar. Is DW-AKADEMIE reacting with similar projects?

To some extent they are very different countries with very different development patterns. There have, of course, been revolutions and there will be elections, but the results can vary from country to country. We won’t be working with the same concepts throughout the region. One of DW-AKADEMIE’s strengths is that we say ‘We will help, but the partners have to say what it is they want and what it is they need.’ Then we can react accordingly. That’s why DW-AKADEMIE’s work in Tunisia or Morocco is different than our work in Egypt, Yemen or Syria. The problems in the Middle East and North Africa are similar. Is DW-AKADEMIE reacting with similar projects?

To some extent they are very different countries with very different development patterns. There have, of course, been revolutions and there will be elections, but the results can vary from country to country. We won’t be working with the same concepts throughout the region. One of DW-AKADEMIE’s strengths is that we say ‘We will help, but the partners have to say what it is they want and what it is they need.’ Then we can react accordingly. That’s why DW-AKADEMIE’s work in Tunisia or Morocco is different than our work in Egypt, Yemen or Syria.


Tunisia's Facebook generation revels in new-found freedom Whether it's Hip Hop with a message or film-making, Tunisia's youth is enjoying its new-found freedom as well as discovering a new sense of political consciousness and responsibility. "Hey, president, your people are dying, they’re starving and living like dogs – and you’re setting the police on them." That’s a taste of the highly political lyrics by popular Tunisian rapper Hamada Ben Amor, better known as "El General." His song "Rayes Le Bled" – a direct address to former President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali – was circulating on the Internet even before the president was toppled in January after a popular uprising. It’s a scathing, angry critique of the unpopular leader. The song, which became an instant hit on Tunisian Facebook pages, earned the 21-year-old rapper a spell in prison. But it also provided the spark for angry anti-government protests, inspiring many young Tunisians to take to the streets. The revolt ultimately led to Ben Ali's ouster, forcing him to flee to Saudi Arabia. Today, no one is afraid of Ben Ali’s regime anymore. Young Tunisians have turned to writing and film-making, poking fun at their former leader. On the campus of Tunis' Technical University, one student imitates the ex-president reminiscing nostalgically about his time as dictator. But then he utters a sentence that would never have passed the lips of the real Ben Ali: "Long live free, democratic Tunisia!" It’s a heady time in Tunisia as young people savor the victory of ending the 23-year rule of a deeply autocratic ruler. People power fuelled by the Internet  The country’s so-called Jasmine Revolution also seems to be alive and kicking on the Internet. Demonstrations, rallies and events are announced and organized via social networking sites such as Facebook and Twitter and numerous blogs. It’s proved highly effective. The lecture hall at the Tunis university is packed with an electrified crowd, celebrating the heroes of the revolution and themselves. A new feeling of solidarity and community is in the air. IT student Walid is amazed at how quickly his generation has changed. Everything, he says, feels different.  Young Tunisians send a clear message to the political establishment  "Young people are suddenly interested not just in their studies or sports or parties – they’re getting involved politically, organizing demonstrations. They have creative ideas – you can’t compare it to how it was earlier." Tunisia’s youth seems to be awakening from a long slumber, proud of their country and what they’ve achieved with their revolt. There’s hardly a sit-in, march or concert without the Tunisian national flag being waved about or the national anthem being played. Young groups of students have begun to sweep the Bourguiba Avenue. It’s a symbolic move, meant to indicate that the young want to get rid of the old order and are willing to take on responsibility. Seba, an engineering student, says students felt worthless during Ben Ali’s rule. Now, she says, all young people suddenly had a pressing need to catch up on their freedom and liberty. It isn’t easy to grasp what’s happening, she adds. "For 23 years, people in this country didn’t get any air to breathe in," Seba says. "And now it’s as if the bird can fly out of its cage but still doesn’t know how to do that." Tunisians, she says, now need the courage to take a few more steps to help forge a new country. Energizing a new generation  Courage is one thing musician Bendir Man has in large supply. Under President Ben Ali, he could only ever play underground at secret concerts attended by a handful of people. Today, thousands come to see the energetic singer with the baseball cap and overtly political lyrics perform on stage. His concert dates are spread via Twitter and his music can be found on online platforms such as Youtube and Dailymotion. His song "System", a satire on the country’s stagnant and entrenched politics and the personality cult of Ben Ali, has been a huge hit on the Internet.  Young Tunisians aren't willing to be fooled by their rulers any more  Bendir Man himself is overwhelmed by the events in his country. "It’s absolutely crazy…it’s pure energy," he says. "And I’m playing my part to ensure that this power helps people along on their way to a new country." The musician warns against seeing young Tunisians as creative but harmless people only interested in celebrating revolution parties. This generation won’t be fooled anymore and neither will the artists, Bendir Man says. "If the politicians don’t stick to their promises, then we’ll help remind them… that’s why we’re here," he says. "It’s up to us, the young generation, to help build a new Tunisia." Author: Alexander Göbel (sp) Editor: Michael Knigge


Tunisia's radicals thriving on dissatisfaction In Tunisia, the eyes of the world are focused on the trial of former president Ben Ali. But conflict between radical Islamists and the police is becoming commonplace. The latest victim was a 22-year-old student. On Wednesday, he was fatally struck by a bullet when a police officer shot into the air to disperse demonstrators. One and a half years after the fall of the Tunisian government, hundreds of Salafists fought street battles with police in the capital Tunis. Fearing further unrest, the authorities then imposed nightly curfews. Salafists interpret Islam very strictly. Some of them sympathize with the extremist Al Qaeda network. Besides the Salafists, Al Qaeda leader Ayman Al-Zawahiri attracted attention earlier this week when he called on Tunisians to revolt and introduce Islamic Sharia law. The people are dissatisfied Salafists are arrested after rioting in Tunis At the same time the judgment of a Tunisian military court drew attention: In a second trial, the judges sentenced former President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali in absentia on Wednesday to life imprisonment. The ex-president, who fled to Saudi Arabia in January 2011, had previously been given 20 years in prison in another verdict. "The current turmoil has nothing to do with sentencing Ben Ali, but with the general dissatisfaction of the people," Günter Meyer, director of the Center for Research on the Arab World at the University of Mainz, said in an interview with DW. "The moderate Islamist party Ennahda joined a coalition with two secular parties. In the first few months, this worked well. But now the leading parliamentarians are more and more isolated. Radical external groups are detaching from the core, which is currently drawing up the new constitution." Clashes over art Günter Meyer: Al Qaeda has no influence in Tunisia Things have not improved for the Tunisian population since the revolution, and for some, the situation is worse. That's why groups are already preparing for the election campaign that will start once the new constitution is adopted, Meyer said: "In doing so, they are distancing themselves from the present government, which is regarded as a failure, politically, economically and socially." The gap between the Islamists and secularists is growing, he said. The core issue in the struggle is the role Islam should play in government and society: "The government advocates a clear separation between state and religion on the basis of the old constitution, which was established in 1959. For example, Ennahda has promised not to prohibit alcohol consumption or to require women to wear the veil." But conservative Muslims want no part in this. They want to strengthen Islam in today's Tunisia, in particular to introduce Islamic Sharia law, he said. The Morning After the Last Day exhibitian drew threats from Islamists The trigger for the riots this week was an art exhibition in a suburb of Tunis, which Islamists said offended Muslims: "The name of Allah is displayed on a screen in the form of insects in the exhibition at La Marsa," Meyer said. This is considered blasphemy: "Whoever protests against it, has the majority of the population in Tunisia on his side." In addition, there were a few pictures in which the Salafists were portrayed critically. That is what caused the trouble, Meyer said. Religious fanatics, criminals and supporters of the old regime Rachid Ghannouchi : In al Qaeda's crosshairs Over the past two to three months, more and more individuals have responded with aggressive attacks, Meyer said. In the countryside, they destroyed shops where alcohol was sold. Liberal and Salafi students clashed and fought. Salafists also attacked women who were in their opinion not dressed conservatively enough. The level of violence now has a dimension that Tunisia has not seen since the days of the revolution, he said. What is clear, however: "Not only religious considerations are playing a role in the current turmoil, but also criminal groups and, not least, supporters of the old regime, who are stoking the riots so as to show that the new regime has failed." Labor unions have also contributed to the instability of the country through numerous strikes and protests. Discontent over the dire economic situation is growing and the prospects are rather bleak, Meyer said: "This poses a risk of more unrest and radicalization. Some even fear a counterrevolution." The country faces a political and economic predicament. Without a strong government and a clear legal framework, private investors will hold back. But they are exactly what Tunisia needs because without investment and economic recovery, discontent will grow and provide a breeding ground for radicals, Meyer said. With all the difficulty the government faces in ensuring security, and despite the poor outlook, Tunisia has at least been spared one crisis point: While Al Qaeda leader Ayman Al-Zawahiri has railed againt the moderate Ennahda party, Meyer said: " We must see clearly that Al Qaeda has no influence in Tunisia. The group is insignificant here." Author: Günther Birkenstock / sgb Editor: Gregg Benzow


Lesbian love story wins Palme d'Or as best film A French film portraying a lesbian love story "Blue is the Warmest Color" has won the Palme d’Or for best film at Cannes. Director Abdellatif Kechiche dedicated the award to the youth of Tunisia, where he was born. The jury at the Cannes Film Festival on Sunday evening selected "Blue Is the Warmest Color: The Life of Adele," as this year's best film from a field of 20 works. The French-language original is called "La vie d'Adèle," using the English-language sub-title. In unusual move, the jury, headed by the American director Steven Spielberg awarded the Palme d'Or not just to the film's French-Tunisian director, Abdellatif Kechiche, but also to the actors who played the main protagonists, Adele Excharopolos and Lea Seydoux. "I should like to dedicate this film to the wonderful youth of France whom I met during the long period while making this film," said the director, who was joined on stage by the two actors said. "Those young people taught me a lot about the spirit of freedom and living together," said Kechiche, an actor who made his directorial debut in 2000. Kechiche, who was born in Tunis, also used the opportunity to back a wave of democracy movements in the Middle East over the past couple of years, which has been dubbed the Arab Spring. "I would also like to dedicate this film to other youth, something which happened not so very long ago, the revolution in Tunisia," he said. "They also have this aspiration to live free, to express themselves freely and to love in full freedom." Spielberg later defended graphic scenes in Kechniche's film: "The film is a great love story that made us all feel privileged to be invited to see this story of deep love and deep heartbreak," Spielberg told reporters. "The director didn't put any constraints on the narrative." Mexican wins best director Cannes' award for best director went to Amat Escalate for his film "Heli" about Mexico's drug wars. America Hollywood veteran Bruce Dern, 76, took home the award as best actor for his performance in the road move "Nebraska." Best actress honors went to France's Berenice Bejo for her role in the patchwork family drama "The Past." Joel and Ethan Coen's "Inside Llewyn Davis" starring Carey Mulligan, Justin Timberlake and newcomer Oscar Isaac about a 1960s folk revival earned the Grand Prix, Cannes' second most prestigious award. Breakout star Isaac accepted the award. Singaporean director Anthony Chen won the Camera d'Or, the award for best first feature, for his "Ilo Ilo." Set during the Asia financial crisis in 1997, the film is about a Singaporean family and its new maid. pfd/ipj (AFP, AP)


Tunisia's ruling coalition agrees on June elections Tunisia's ruling coalition says it has agreed to hold presidential and parliamentary elections on June 23 next year. It says the president will be directly chosen by voters. The ruling coalition, headed by the Islamic Ennahda Movement, said in a statement on Sunday that an agreement had been reached setting "June 23, 2012, as the date for legislative and presidential elections," with a presidential runoff scheduled for July 7. The coalition went on to say that the parties had agreed "on a mixed political system in which the president will be elected by universal suffrage for a better balance of power, including at the heart of executive branch." The agreement must be approved by the Constituent Assembly, where the ruling coalition has a majority of the 217 seats. Balance of institutional power The coalition's agreement on an election date and an amended parliamentary system came after the opposition accused Ennahda of wanting to control the government and avoid elections. Ennahda had called for a purely parliamentary system, while the rest of the parties wanted a dual political system. The amended system will have powers balanced between the parliament and the president. Disagreements over the nature of the political system have been delaying the drafting of the new constitution by Tunisia's interim parliament. The ruling coalition also includes two secular parties: the Congress for the Republic and the Ettakatol. The Islamic Ennahda Movement won the country's first free elections last October after former President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali was ousted in January 2011 after weeks of protests. The Tunisian revolution inspired the wave of "Arab Spring" uprisings that spread across the Middle East and North Africa last year. The Constituent Assembly elected Moncef Marzouki as president in December 2011 to replace Ben Ali. tj/slk (Reuters, AFP)


Legal cases continue a decade after Djerba Ten years after a suicide bomber blew up a truck laden with gas-filled bottles at a synagogue on Tunisia's holiday island of Djerba, survivors and relatives in Germany continue to struggle with the attack's effects. A decade ago, 24-year-old suicide bomber Nizar Nawar took the lives of 21 people by driving a truck loaded with natural gas against the wall of El Ghriba Synagogue on the island of Djerba. Fourteen of the dead were tourists from Germany. The al-Qaeda terrorist network later took responsibility for the attack. In 2006, Belgacem Nawar, the attacker's uncle, was tried as an accomplice in a Tunisian court. Nawar received a 20-year prison sentence with an extra five years of preventative detention. In February 2009, a Paris court also found guilty Christian Ganczarski, a German convert to Islam and al-Qaeda member, and sentenced him to 18 years in prison. A year later, a jury in France awarded punitive damages totaling 2.4 million euros ($1.6 million at the time) to 21 German survivors and victims' relatives. The compensation has yet to be fully dispersed to the recipients. Old wounds reopened Court cases, like the one that took place in this Paris courtroom, reopen victims' wounds About 1.7 million euros are still to be paid. As long as the funds are not handed out and the court process continues, many of the victims will constantly be reminded of the incident and its consequences, said attorney Judith Adam-Caumeil, who represents 21 German victims and relatives. "One man from Berlin is still struggling with the fact that he lost his mother under these terrible circumstances. Ten years later, when he testified before the jury in Paris, he was still under shock," Adam-Caumeil told DW. The attorney also represents the father of a boy, who was just 4 years old at the time, and who suffered very serious burns from the attack. The father "no longer wanted to be confronted" with the situation, Adam-Caumeil said. When he testified, eight years after the fact, he spent many nights fretting over what he had said, especially since he was standing directly opposite Ganczarski, one of the bombing's accomplices, Adam-Caumeil said.. German patients were brought back to Hamburg for treatment It was, of course, a relief for the victims that the instigators of the attack had been arrested and put on trial, noted Adam-Caumeil, but she also added that "the wounds were re-opened just the same." The attorney expects a ruling on the compensation payout some time this year. However, she also said she expects that, depending on the verdict, either the French guarantee fund or her clients will appeal; in which case, the trial could go on for another two years. German tourists avoid Djerba The bombing's effects on the tourism industry can also still be felt. Ahead of the attack some 300,000 German tourists annually visited Djerba. The Tunisian government attempted to play down the attack's significance "The attack, of course, had devastating effects on German tourism," said Andrea Philippi of the Tunisian Tourist Board in Germany. "At the time it fell by about 50 percent." In 2003, there were only 120,000 tourists from Germany, and in the following years that number slowly climbed to about 150,000. Although the overall number of foreign visitors to Djerba returned to pre-attack levels within two years, Germans have continued to avoid the island. In addition to Germany having the highest number of victims in the bombing, Philippi said the government's actions at the time were also partly responsible for keeping Germans away. "You have to say that at the time the communication from the state was completely wrong," she said. Djerba of tomorrow The Tunisian government in control at the time attempted to downplay the attack and called it an accident. It's a mistake the government later realized and for which it apologized. Approaching the synagogue by car is no longer so easy "In January 2011, we had a revolution in Tunisia and the first minister who came after the revolution apologized in his first conference with German journalists and the current minister has done so as well," Philippi said. After the uprising that saw former Tunisian dictator Zine El Abidine Ben Ali, tourism to Tunisia has also dropped, making the future of the industry across the entire country difficult to estimate. "We saw a 41 percent drop in the German market," Philippi said. "But it is starting to improve." The Thomas Cook and TUI tour agencies have said bookings for Tunisia have fallen dramatically, but added that they have noticed more people interested in traveling to the North African country this year. A TUI representative told DW that although they are not at the level of a decade ago, trips to Djerba have also increased since the beginning of 2012. Author: Marco Müller / srs, sms Editor: Gregg Benzow


Moderate Islamist party claims victory in Tunisia Tunisia's main Islamist party has claimed victory in the country's first free election since former dictator Ben Ali was forced out in January. The party has said it's open to an alliance with the top secularist parties. Tunisia's main Islamist party, Ennahda, which until early this year was banned and had hundreds of followers in prison, has claimed victory in the country's first democratic election. Though official results are not expected until Tuesday, the moderate party said its workers had tallied results posted on polling stations after Sunday's vote and claimed to have the largest share of votes. Party officials estimated Ennahda had taken at least 30 percent of the 217-seat assembly, though some estimates placed that number closer to 50 percent. "The first confirmed results show that Ennahda has obtained first place," said executive party member Abdelhamid Jlazzi outside party headquarters in the capital, Tunis, on Monday. Maya Jribi, the leader of the secular center-left PDP party, seen as Ennahda's main challenger before the vote, has conceded defeat. "The trend is clear. The PDP is badly placed. It is the decision of the Tunisian people. I bow before their choice," she told AFP. The vote marked the first free election in the Arab world since uprisings began in Tunisia in January. The revolution ousted longtime dictator President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali and subsequently inspired revolt throughout the region. Secular alliance  Ghannouchi has said Ennahda will not enforce a "morality code" on Tunisians Ennahda's critics have accused the party of preaching radicalism in the mosques and see the resurgence of Islamists as a threat to modern, liberal values. Party officials, however, have said they are open to forming an alliance with two secularist parties, Congress for the Republic and Ettakatol. Both parties are expecting to get about 15 percent of the vote. "We will spare no effort to create a stable political alliance," said Jlazzi. "We would like to reassure our trade and economic partners, and all actors and investors, we hope very soon to have stability and the right conditions for investment in Tunisia." "We respect the rights of women ... and equality between Tunisians whatever their religion, their sex or their social status," his colleague Nourreddine Bhiri told AFP. Party leader Rachid Ghannouchi, who was forced into exile for 22 years by Ben Ali's police, has said Ennahda will not enforce any morality code on Tunisian society or its millions of Western tourists. He likens his party's approach to the moderate Islamism of Turkish Prime Minister Tayyip Erdogan and his ruling Justice and Development Party. 'Historic moment' Sunday's vote, designed with checks and balances to prevent any one party from obtaining a majority, was to elect a constituent assembly for a term of one year. The assembly, expected to include as many parties as possible, will draft a new constitution and appoint a new interim president and government to run the country until fresh elections late next year or in early 2013. It will also have interim authority to write laws and pass budgets. The current interim government will stay in power until the assembly appoints a new president, which is not expected before November 9. Standing amid supporters shouting "God is great!" outside Ennahda headquarters, Zeinab Omri, a young woman wearing an Islamic head scarf, told the Reuters news agency that the vote was "an historic moment." "No one can doubt this result. This result shows very clearly that the Tunisian people is a people attached to its Islamic identity." Author: Martin Kuebler (AFP, AP, Reuters) Editor: Andy Valvur


Tunisia's Arab Spring wilts in political limbo Tunisia is the cradle of the Arab Spring, but three years after the uprising began, the political transformation process has come to a standstill - with serious consequences for the people and the economy. The Arab Spring revolts across the Middle East began in a small town in Tunisia with the desperation of a street vendor, Mohammed Bouazizi. The authorities in his town of Sidi Bouzid had repeatedly closed his vegetable stand and confiscated his produce. When he complained, he was taken to the police station and beaten. Bouazizi turned to a radical form of protest. Three years ago, on December 17, 2010, he set himself on fire. His protest unleashed a conflagration. People all over the country took to the streets to protest against the economic hardships they had to endure and to demand more freedom. It was the beginning of the end for Tunisia's dictator, Zine el Abidine Ben Ali. No future in the provinces Badreddine Hamlaoui lives in Siliana, a small city of 25,000 inhabitants, north of Sidi Bouzid. For Hamlaoui, not much has changed since Bouazizi's self-immolation. Tunisia's provinces, in general, are still regions without jobs and opportunities. "Unemployment, poverty, misery: we live under desperate condition," says the 19-year-old. "I ask myself why Siliana is neglected and cut off from development." Tunisia has seen frequent protests and strikes against the government. The unemployment rate in Tunisia is around 16 percent, but in the provinces - in towns like Siliana and Sidi Bouzid - it is as much as 29 percent. Among young people, in some places, one-in-two are without a job. "The provinces are ignored and marginalized," says Mohammed Miraoui, chairman of the regional labor union, Gafsa, in the south of the country. "The policies of the government are to blame," he says. Investor exodus The economic situation in coastal regions is also difficult. Tourism, once a major source of income and foreign currency, never rebounded after the revolution. And foreign investors are skeptical about the country's development prospects and have pulled out. Until last July, Mohammad abd el Momen worked in a factory in Bizerte, north of the capital, Tunis. Momen made heavy duty boots for construction workers. But then his Italian employers closed the factory and 4,500 people lost their jobs. "We started the revolution, but then the politicians got the jobs and we were left with the tragedy," laments Momen. He says he doesn't have enough money to buy milk for his children. Police investigate a crime scene on one of Tunisia's once idyllic Mediterranean beaches. Political stagnation What Tunisia needs is a functioning government. "The transformation has completely stalled," notes Joachim Paul from the German Heinrich Böll Foundation in Tunis. "We are witnessing a phase of transition and insecurity," he says, and that's why there are no economic reforms or investment. The latest episode in the political crisis began with the assassination of leftist opposition figure Mohammed Brahmi at the end of July. The murder was blamed on radical Salafists, but the secular opposition said the government of the moderate Islamist Ennahda party was also to blame. After the attack, tens of thousands of Tunisians repeatedly marched through the streets to protest against the democratically elected Ennahda government. To prevent an escalation, Ennahda agreed to step down and participate in a "national dialogue." The result of those consultations led to plans for a new constitution, a reform of voting rights and fresh elections. However, the country is still waiting for the implementation of these plans. Until last week, the parties were unable to agree on a new prime minister. According to Joachim Paul, the government and opposition were afraid of being excluded from power if a compromise was reached, but at the same time, he thinks that "both sides ultimately wanted to keep the country and society from sliding further into chaos or violence." That is also what the head of Ennahda, Rached Ghannouchi, has declared: "We have a conflict, but we are fighting with words, the courts and the law - not with bullets." "We have a conflict - but no bullets," says Rached Ghannouchi, of Tunisia's Islamist Ennahda Party. A life in dignity But then, in early December, the UGTT trade union, one of the mediators in the "national dialogue," issued an ultimatum to the government and opposition demanding agreement on an interim premier within 10 days; otherwise the talks would be broken off. Tunisia's political parties finally agreed last Saturday (14.12.2013) to choose Industry Minister Mehdi Jomaa to head a government of independent figures tasked with organizing elections in 2014. The months of wrangling have been accompanied by repeated strikes and protests. Badreddine Hamlaoui, the young man from Siliana, also attended the demonstrations, well aware of how quickly the situation can escalate in Tunisia. A year ago, for the last anniversary, he also took to the streets to protest. The police fired into the crowds and Hamlaoui lost an eye. But that hasn't intimidated him: "We just want to live a life in dignity," he says.


Fractured interests threaten Libya's development Renegade soldiers want to drive Islamist forces from Libya. The government in Tripoli is too weak to do so. DW takes a look at some of the most important issues in the current situation in Libya. Three years after the uprising began against long-time ruler Moammar Gadhafi, Libya appears to be back where it started: There is still no constitution and the government is not functioning. The recent chaos on Friday (16.05.2014) started as renegade soldiers under the command of former Major General Khalifa Haftar began an unauthorized military operation against radical Islamic brigades in the eastern city of Benghazi. More than 75 people were killed in the fighting. On Sunday, the unrest spread to the capital, Tripoli, with further deaths and injuries as militias attacked and stormed parliament. Neither the government nor the militias seem strong enough to take power completely. Who is Khalifa Haftar? Khalifa Haftar once commanded Gadhafi's armed forces. He later renounced the Libyan ruler and moved to the United States. There he joined the opposition in exile. When the revolution in Libya began in 2011, he returned and supported fighters in their military resistance in Benghazi. "He fought as one of the most important rebel leaders against Gadhafi," said Günter Meyer at the Center for Research on the Arab World (CERAW) in Mainz, Germany. The attackers used anti-aircraft weapons and set parliament on fire In post-Gadhafi Libya, Haftar became part of an ongoing power struggle for leadership of the country's army. He was originally supposed to take over the armed forces structures. That plan was thwarted by the shotgun adoption of a law in summer 2013, when a militia-besieged parliament agreed at gunpoint to the so-called "isolation law": Anyone who had held a government position under Gadhafi could no longer work in government - even if they had contributed significantly to the fall of Gadhafi. "He saw himself being booted out by the new law," said Libya expert Günter Meyer. Khalifa Haftar is rumored to be in contact with the CIA from his time as an exiled opposition activist. According to information from the Saudi-owned Al-Arabiya news channel, Haftar is now supported in his fight against Libyan Islamists by both Saudi Arabia and Egypt. Who belongs to his militia? In a television address in Februray, Haftar threatened to overthrow parliament, which he considers illegitimate. He also called on the head of the Libyan army to save the nation. Shortly thereafter, he managed to occupy two military bases in the east of the country, with some tribal militias joining him to fight against Islamists in Benghazi. He now receives backing from the influential Zintan militia in the capital, as well. They were the ones who stormed parliament. "The country's currently splitting into Haftar followers and supporters of the members of government," says Meyer. It remains difficult to assess jjust how extensive that support really is. Haftar and his fighters do not see themselves as militias, but rather as a part of the national armed forces. What is Haftar's goal? General Haftar and his supporters are fighting against extremist militias and their supporters; among the latter they include members of parliament. Their self-declared goal is to drive Islamist forces and their supporters from the country. A power vacuum currently exists in Libya, with militias and various tribes striving to fill it. After storming parliament Sunday, Libya's military police chief, Mochtar Fernana, who has also joined Haftar's men, had this message to Libyans: "The Libyan people will not allow their country to become a hotbed of terrorists and extremists." Parliament was dissolved, and a newly-elected commission will begin to write up a constitution. Militias in Tripoli were part of the parliamentary attack Haftar's efforts against Islamists in the east enjoys a certain degree of popular sympathy, given the impotence of the country's nascent army. Observers therefore do not rule out that support for him could further increase - should he have success. Haftar tried unsuccessfully to overthrow the government last spring. How much influence does the government have? "The government is powerless to the greatest extent possible. The country is dominated by rival militias," says Günter Meyer. Interim President Abdulla al-Thinni will remain in office for now. But the head of state announced his resignation weeks ago due to threats by militias that they would harm his family. His successor, who was elected by the now-disbanded parliament and will also play an interim role, must first form a government before he can take over. Could Libya destabilize its neighbors? Libya is already placing neighboring countries in danger. The ousting of Gadhafi and the power vacuum that ensued allowed Islamist forces in Tunisia, Algeria and Mali to gain strength, while Libyan weapons were shuttled across the border. Egypt's intelligence service, says Middle East expert Meyer, claims there is an al Qaeda training camp in Libya. At a March conference on Libya held in Rome, German Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier and his French counterpart, Laurent Fabius, promised to assist the Libyan government in securing uncontrolled weapons stocks. Meyer is skeptical. "Given the current balance of power, I see no opportunity to support a government that failed over the course of three years to build a national army they can rely on. Power is extremely fragmented." What can the West do? The US government fears Libya will become a key country for the promotion of global terrorism. "Haftar and the US government have a shared interest here, but it's not known whether there's direct collusion," Middle East expert Meyer says. In Sicily, US marines have already been placed on alert and some 5,000 Tunisian troops have marched to Libya's border.


Power struggles define the Middle East in 2013 A military coup in Egypt, assassinations in Tunisia, civil war in Syria: The Middle East saw heavy power struggles this year. DW reviews key developments in countries still grappling with the effects of the Arab Spring. Egypt: The old guard returns Mohammed Morsi is furious. Standing upright in his cage, he shouts at the judge in an unwavering voice, "You have no right to convict me. I'm your president!" The deposed Egyptian president has been on trial since November on charges of conspiracy to murder. If he's found guilty, he faces life in jail or the death penalty. Just recently he was serving as the country's democratically elected leader; now he's being tried as a criminal. Morsi is the region's biggest political loser this year. In July 2013 the Egyptian military put an end to Morsi's brief rule, following massive demonstrations. "Egypt's old regime is back in power," comments Guido Steinberg, a Middle East expert at the German Institute for International and Security Affairs (SWP). The Muslim Brotherhood, which until a few months ago held both the presidency, with Morsi, and a parliamentary majority, is now banned. The leaders of the political alliance have all been arrested, and thousands of their supporters have been killed. "The military regime is now taking very decisive action to destroy the Muslim Brotherhood," says Guido Steinberg, "more decisive than Mubarak [Ed. note: Hosni Mubarak, the Egyptian president deposed in 2011] ever was on the matter." The head of Egypt's military, Abdel Fattah al-Sisi, appointed the country's current leader The country's military has gone after both sides of the political spectrum: the Muslim Brotherhood on the right, and liberal revolutionaries on the left. The latter have taken little action in response. They're both tired and frustrated from the enduring struggle for power in Egypt. Although many observers are skeptical, the Egyptian military has repeatedly given assurances that it does not want to remain in power indefinitely. The Military Council says it plans to have a new constitution in place in 2014, which will be followed by parliamentary and presidential elections. Until then, interim President Adli Mansur, appointed by the Egyptian army's Commander-in-Chief Abdel Fattah al-Sisi, will continue to govern the country. Tunisia: Hardening fronts The Arab Spring began in 2011 in Tunisia. The first election brought the moderate Islamists of the Ennahda party to power. Its leaders have trembled at the political developments in Egypt. The fate of the Muslim Brotherhood there represents a nightmare for Tunisian Islamists. Tunisian leaders are acutely aware that protesters could topple the government again Meanwhile, the country is facing its own share of problems. In late July 2013, the left-wing opposition figure Mohammed Brahmi was murdered. Members of Ennahda blamed radical Salafists, while Tunisia's opposition party has implicated Ennahda itself. Brahmi's death mobilized tens of thousands of Tunisians to take to the streets in protest. In order to avoid an escalation of the protests, Ennahda ultimately agreed to a "national dialogue" with the opposition. This is set to involve a new constitution, a reform of voting laws and, ultimately, fresh elections. But moving ahead with those plans has proved difficult. Until now, the country's parties have been unable to agree on a new prime minister. Tunisia offers a second case in which the party leaders ousted in the 2011 revolution still have strong influence with the country's security personnel. "Ennahda is cooperating with the old powers in the country," says Middle East expert Hamadi El-Aouni of the Free University of Berlin. Libya: Powerless central government Libya has descended deeper and deeper into chaos in 2013. The authority of its central government scarcely extends beyond the borders of the capital, Tripoli. Militias control the rest of the country, where regional powers and representatives of divergent ideologies violently struggle for power. "It's a civil war of various tribes and regions," explains Hamadi El-Aouni. Interim Prime Minister Ali Zeidan heads a government with little power The central government is powerless against the militias, as even interim Prime Minister Ali Zeidan has admitted. In October, he was kidnapped for several hours by one such militia. He and the General National Congress, the parliament elected democratically in summer 2012, face massive criticism. Their critics say they've done little to address the country's problems. Zeidan's period as interim head of state comes to an end in February 2014. He has yet to even begin his intended task, which is to work out a constitution. A 60-person constitutional commission isn't scheduled to be chosen until 2014. But the analyst El-Aouni does not believe that Libya's old powers will return to the helm. "They no longer exist; they're gone," he says. "Neutralized, or out of the country." Syria: The civil war continues Syrian leader Bashar Assad is once again sitting firmly in the saddle. In 2013, the Syrian army was able to recapture a number of rebel strongholds. "The army controls up to around 80 percent of the territory again," says El-Aouni. 2013 proved a good year for Syrian leader Bashar Assad and his forces Politically, Assad is also no longer as isolated as he was in 2012. He's indispensible to those who would seek a peace treaty in the country, and his deal on destroying Syrian chemical weapons arsenals turned him into a negotiation partner for the West. Furthermore, after the vacillations of 2013, it seems clear that in the near term at least there will be no military campaign against the country from abroad. "The Americans aren't daring to try a war," says El-Aouni. Meanwhile, the opposition in Syria is more splintered than ever. It is divided into various groups and associations rooted both within and beyond the country. In some cases, the groups are now fighting against each other. Over the course of the year, many have grown even more radical. No end in sight for the revolution Military coups, assassinations, civil war - 2013 was a tumultuous year in the Middle East. But that comes as no surprise to the SWP's Guido Steinberg, who says, "The beginning of the Arab Spring in 2011 was just the prelude to a series of years in which changes are taking place. Of course, we're not going to like all of them." However, the researcher sees little reason for resignation, saying that, on the whole, the region is undergoing a "positive development." In his view, the Middle East will profit in the long term from the revolutionary movements that began in 2011, likely resulting in the end in a region that's more democratic than ever before.


The quiet environmental disaster in Tunisia Tunisia is the fifth largest exporter of phosphate in the world. But though its byproducts are toxic, one factory in the coastal city of Gabes still channels 13,000 tons of the dangerous pollutant into the sea every day. The sun sets behind the palm trees of Chatt Essalam, painting the sea in bright gold. The waves of the Gulf of Gabes gently lap against the beach. It's an idyllic setting, but Gabes, a city with 150,000 residents in southern Tunisia, can hardly pass as idyllic. The waters of the Gulf are dead. Industrial pollution has led to the ecological destruction. The stench of ammonia hangs in the air; a thick, black brew bubbles up from a sewer and then flows right into the sea. Gabes' coastal waters are loaded with phosphogypsum, a toxic, slightly radioactive byproduct of the phosphate refining process. Phosphate rock is processed in industrial plants to make phosphoric acids for use in the agriculture fertilizer and food preservative industries. Tunisia may not have many raw material reserves, but the North African nation is a huge global exporter of phosphate. Phosphate mining is therefore a pillar of the national economy, but it comes at the expense of the environment. Not what it used to be "We always used to have fish for dinner after the farmers plowed their fields," Mondher, a resident, recalled. "The sea was so close, the fish would just jump onto the fields. As a kid, I used to swim with the fish and prawns in the sea." Swimming like this in Tunis is not possible near Chatt Essalam, Gabes, Tunisia - the waters are toxic Mondher is a male nurse who grew up in the Gabes suburb called Chatt Essalam. It's an oasis located directly at the sea waters - a unique setting in Tunisia. But it is here where the Tunisian Chemical Group built their factory in the early 1970s. Since then, farming has decreased bit by bit in the region. And when the sea does wash something up on shore, it's now usually dead fish or turtles who have tortuously perished. Transplanting the problem? Not far from the factory, meters-high piles of phosphate sit outside under the open sky. The phosphate is brought in from the mining region up-country, to be refined in Gabes and then shipped around the world. Noureddine Trabelsi is divisional director for environmental concerns at the Chemical Group and aims to advance projects that control damage to the environment. He enthusiastically describes the new plans, placing reports and papers containing figures on the table. "We have problems with environmental pollution; we can't deny that," he said, pointing out a scheme drawn up years previously, before the revolution, to update the factory. But the projects were complex, and politicians did not offer support. "But the volition is there now, and we have to take advantage of that opportunity," he said. One new project consists of depositing the phosphogypsum underground, 25 kilometers (16 miles) away from the factory - to keep it from harming the environment. But now, residents from a nearby village are beginning to protest, fearing that the problem will only be transplanted. If the byproducts are not cleaned up before they are stored away, the village residents could also suffer from the toxins and radioactivity. Not enough money Phosphate treatment has dangerous byproducts The Chemical Group has estimated that the new plan would cost some 400 million dinars (around 200 million euros, or $262 million), but the company does not have access to those kinds of funds. Employees have striked for weeks and months in the past for better working conditions, bringing production to a standstill and causing main clients to look for new suppliers. There's no money to pay for environmental issues. So Trabelsi is hoping the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development will continue to help out. It already has given support for one project aimed at reducing pollution. It would take three years to get the new project off the ground, but the Gulf of Gabes would need much longer to recover, said Monia Guiza, director of the Department of Chemical Engineering at the University of Gabes. "We would maybe see plants begin to grow in 20 years. That wouldn't happen overnight because the damage is so immense," she said. "But it would be nice if we could leave a clean sea behind for our kids, because that would be a true fortune for Gabes." The sea is not the only thing to suffer from the chemical industry. The business has also put farmers' livelihoods and residents' health at risk. The hazardous emissions cause acid rain, with the toxins landing in the ground water. Nurse Mondher, a member of the Association for the Protection of the Chatt Essalam Oasis, sees the consequences of that every day in his work: asthma, skin disorders, cancer, birth defects. "The number of fatalities rises every year," Mondher noted. "A child that is born now will die at 40 or 50 from an illness that used to be extremely rare." The Tunisian Chemical Group is meanwhile relatively open in its communication policy, but those in charge at the chemical plant do not want to discuss health problems employees and nearby residents face. The radioactivity in the area is far below safety limits, the company stresses. Official figures and scientific studies on increased rates of cancer in the region do not exist. Aat least the first measures to reduce pollution have begun. By 2015, ammonia, nitrogen oxide and sulfur emmisions are supposed to correspond to European standards. But, that could be too late both for the environment and for many people in the Gabes region.


Mubarak awaits judgment The former Egyptian president has waited a full year to answer in court. On Saturday his judge will sent a clear message to the country with the verdict. There he lay, the old man on his gurney. He seemed barely able to move, to follow the goings on around him. Observers accuse him of merely faking his infirmity to garner the court's - and the public's - sympathy. But the image's effect is not a show: the man on the stretcher embodied utter powerlessness and helplessness – a shocking impression of someone who, for decades like no other, was the symbol of absolute power to the Egyptian people. Now, before the judge, Hosni Mubarak answered to the citizens of the state, the citizens of a country he had ruled for 30 years. The president behind bars: a stronger symbol of the success of the revolution is hard to imagine. For the first time ever, a former head of state in the Arab world was on trial. The Tunisian President Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali, for example, was sentenced in absentia. Mubarak had to face his judges personally. During his tenure Egyptian politicians enjoyed impunity – now the judicial process against Mubarak shows those days are over. That, explains Mona Abaza, a sociologist at the American University in Cairo, is a liberating feeling for many Egyptians. Three counts Egyptians protested loudly against candidates aligned with former president Mubarak The prosecution accuses Mubarak of three things. The most serious accusation is the responsibility for murder and the attempted murder of hundreds of peaceful demonstrators in Cairo, Alexandria, Suez and other Egyptian cities between January 25-31, 2011 – that crucial week of the Egyptian revolution which resulted in the resignation of Mubarak on February 11. Mubarak was accused of having given the order to violently crack down on protesters. While protesters also died in the days following those listed, due to the government's use of force, the charge is limited to the events leading up to January 31. The second charge revolves around the unlawful exertion of influence in favor of entrepreneur and real estate developer Hussein Salem. This man, according to allegations, purchased property at a price far below market value in the Egyptian spa resort Sharm el-Sheikh for the development of a resort for golf and tourism. In return he is supposed to have given the president several luxury villas. Third, the prosecution accuses Mubarak of having had his hand in Salem's profitable gas business deal in Israel. Elusive evidence The Egyptians, clarifies lawyer Hafez Abu Seada, chairman of the Egyptian Organization for Human Rights, are observing the trial closely. They were particularly incensed by the numerous fatalities in the last weeks of January, 2011. “Most Egyptians expect a harsh judgment against President Mubarak. They're of the opinion that, because of the bloodshed throughout the days of revolution, he must be judged.” Two candidates from a long list of contenders now face each other in a run-off election Whether it will come to that, however, Abu Seada can't say. What can be clearly identified is Mubarak's roll in gas transactions. “Only on this point is there any evidence,” says Seada. As for the other two charges, the lawyer is more restrained. Regarding what is for many Egyptians the most important charge – the ordering of violent measures in the days of revolution – the evidence is sparse.  “One reason is that the two main witnesses, former Defense Minister Mohammed Hussein Tantawi and previous Intelligence Chief and Egyptian Vice President Suleiman, declared in their trial testimony that President Mubarak did not give commands to the interior minister and defense minister to use violent measures against the demonstrators. Allegations of legal inconsistency Egyptians are eagerly awaiting the court's evaluation of the evidence. One thing that disturbs them – completely independent of the judgment – is the fact that Mubarak has to answer before a civil court, while 12,000 demonstrators stand before military tribunals. In military tribunals, the defense has significantly fewer rights than in civil courts. As a result they can neither freely choose their lawyer, nor adequately prepare their defense. Many Egyptians are skeptical with regard to other trials in which officers have to answer for violence. Many of their countrymen, said Mona Abaza from the American University in Cairo, doubt that the trials will be carried out appropriately. Protesters waved their shoes to show their disdain of the election process Again, the judgment against Mubarak may come to nothing. Legally, the events of the revolution and the responsibility of the varied state agencies involved have not yet been clarified. His organization, says Hafez Abu Seada, therefore sees itself as attacking on three fronts. First, they will try to defend the spirit and institutions of a civil society that sees itself under attack. Second, they will work on the development of freedom and civil rights and pursue any relevant debates in Egyptian parliament. Third, they will continue to work on torture cases from the time of the old regime. From the perspective of many protesters, the Egyptian revolution, especially after the first round of presidential elections, has taken a sobering turn. Given the strong symbolism attached to the beginning of Mubarak's trial, it remains to be seen which message will be received at the trial's end. Author: Kerstin Knipp /cd Editor: Gregg Benzow


Tunisia's Ennahda party seeks modern image Campaigning in Tunisia is set to get underway for elections later in the month. The powerful Islamist party Ennahda is a top favorite. It is modernizing its image, for example by nominating a female candidate. Hundreds of men and women attended the recent gathering of the Ennahda party in Tunis' Palais de Congres. Following a joint prayer, party chairman Rachid Ghannouchi said Ennahda - "renaissance" in Arabic - vowed to build a democracy based on Islamic values. He sought to allay fears that the status of women, which is among the most advanced in the region, would suffer as a result. "We don't make a difference between the sexes," Ghannouchi said. "Rather, we acknowledge the rights of women in education, public life and also, of course, in equal rights." The supporters were enthusiastic, reacting with thunderous applause. One woman at the launch of the party's program attracted particular attention: Souad Abderrahim. She had taken a seat between the men on the podium. Her black pantsuit was slim-fitting and modern, with her brown, shoulder-length hair worn down. Preserving the Arab-Islamic identity  Ghannouchi returned from 20 years in British exile in January Abderrahim heads the Ennahda list in a Tunis constituency for the elections on October 23. As her party colleagues gave their speeches, Abderrahim smiled and clapped approvingly. But she didn't address the audience directly. After the official event she introduced herself and explained why she had joined an Islamist party. Ennahda gave many spirited women the chance to actively contribute to political change in Tunisia, she said. She had already fought for equality as a trade unionist when she was younger. But the party was open for all Tunisian women, she said. "I believe in the sincerity of Ennahda, otherwise it wouldn't have placed a woman like me at the top of their party list," Abderrahim said. A woman like her? Abderrahim was referring to the fact that she is the sole candidate who doesn't wear a headscarf. At first glance, she appears cosmopolitan and moderate. Ennahda offered to nominate her as a candidate a few months ago. The trained pharmacist, who runs a wholesale company for pharmaceuticals, accepted because she was convinced of Ennahda's program, she said. "It's important to me that it wants to preserve the Arab-Islamic identity." Already as a young woman, Abderrahim joined an Islamic student union. The regime of toppled dictator Zine El Abidine Ben Ali had her arrested when she became too critical, she said. She was expelled from the university and could only complete her studies later. For her, the revolution in Tunisia was a sort of "renaissance" which Ennahda already attests in its name. Turkey as a role model The legalization of the party on March 1, 2011 marked the beginning of Abderrahim's career as a politician. But the competition is fierce. The country is divided into 27 constituencies, plus six districts for the many Tunisians living abroad. Dozens of lists have been compiled so that in the end 217 parliamentarians make up the constituent assembly charged with rewriting the country's constitution, and deciding on the future power division in Tunisia. Abderrahim, who's in her mid-40s, is organizing her campaign from Ennahda's brand new headquarters in Tunis' modern Montplaisir neighborhood. Every Tunisian is familiar with the building by now. The new rooms still smell of paint. On the walls, there are pictures of Turkey's Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan, which Ennahda likes to present as a prime example of how openness and Islam can be compatible. It appears Ennahda has significant financial means at its disposal. Following the revolution, it quickly opened offices across the country. Critics fear that the funds are coming from the Gulf States in order to undercut secular movements and create strict Islamic structures. Tunisia's political direction  Tunisia will be the first nation to hold elections since the Arab Spring began  Abderrahim said she wants to do away with the preconceptions of the party and tells a story of how she too was told as a child to fear bearded men, who have commonly been associated with a reactionary Islam. "Ennahda is a moderate party and the fear of it was fueled by the old regime," she said. "It painted an incorrect picture of us." A spokesman from the party's press department who has been put at her disposal nodded in agreement. Many citizens admire those Islamists who hung in there, even when they were in prison. Opinion polls show that Ennahda could win 20 to 30 percent of the votes in the October 23 elections. These forecasts mean Ennahda could therefore trump any secular party in Tunisia, even if they don't win the absolute majority. Opponents fear that a religiously motivated shift to the right would then threaten the country. Tunisian civil liberties lawyer Jaouhar Ben Mubarak considers Abderrahim's nomination pure window dressing. She is simply supposed to make the party appear more open and modern. "It's crystallized that though Ennahda talks about a secular state, it wants to use the Sharia as the source of the Tunisian constitution," Ben Mubarak said. Islamic and democratic  Abderrahim considers herself in good hands politically  Abderrahim has had to take a lot of criticism from all sides, even from her own ranks. Female party supporters who wear headscarves object to her liberal dress style. Salafists don't tolerate her candidacy at all. Even her own 14-year-old daughter fears that Ennahda could prescribe what she has to wear or forbid any contact to boys. But her mother doesn't take these fears seriously. "It's also my task to explain to young people that Ennahda's program will not restrict them in any way," Abderrahim said. According to the party program, Ennahda wants to remedy the "shortcomings" of late marriage and the high rate of divorce in Tunisia. Abderrahim herself married at a young age and lives with her husband Anouar Landa and their two children in a large, grandiose house with a swimming pool. Her husband supports her, helps with the family and the pharmaceutical business, so that Abderrahim can take care of her political career - a model family. The living room is decorated with oriental touches. Several sofas grace the large room. On the walls are pictures and mirrors in golden frames. Abderrahim, her husband and several press people from the party sit down. The men listen attentively to what the candidate has to say and why she has found her spot in a religious party of all places. She said she would never join a feminist organization. She sees her interests better represented in an Islamic movement. "I respect the traditions of Tunisian society and adhere to them," Abderrahim said. "We at Ennahda want to protect these Arab-Islamic traditions." So does that leave room for democracy? The question agitates her. She speaks quickly and loudly until her press people calm her down. "Islam and democracy do not rule each other out," she then said. There is also diversity of opinion in Islam and therefore one can't allege there isn't any democracy in Islamic countries. "We Tunisians want to be the first country in the region to prove that both are possible," Abderrahim said. Author: Diana Hodali (sac) Editor: Rob Mudge


DW Global Media Forum strives for 'global human rights alliance' At a time when human rights are in the focus of media reports, journalists from all over the globe came together in Bonn, Germany, to discuss how best to cover rights advancements and violations. This year's fourth annual Deutsche Welle Global Media Forum came at a critical moment in the reshaping of global human rights, when the future of many parts of the world remained uncertain. "We must forge a global alliance for human rights," urged DW Director-General Erik Bettermann in an address at the end of the three-day international conference in Bonn. Addressing delegate journalists from some 100 nations, Bettermann said the media must starting paying more attention to the subject - and that did not just apply to Africa and the Middle East. Mhenni says it was the people, not the Internet, who rebeled in Tunisia Europe, he said, also needed to "shed its blinkers, and must not think first of others when it comes to human rights. Respect for human rights and their implementation always has to start at home." Bettermann said the media must strive to fulfill their responsibilities in safeguarding human rights across the globe. "Without human rights there can be no civil society. Without them there can be no legal security, no economic prosperity. It's up to the media to get that message across." Bettermann added in his conclusion that the Forum's 1,600 international participants made the conference "a mirror of human rights experiences around the world." New media and human rights Human trafficking, free online speech and Latin American drug wars were some of the many topics touched on at the Global Media Forum's more than 50 conferences and workshops. Workshops offered the participating journalists a chance to discuss, for instance, how they could report on human rights issues without infringing on victims' rights.  Reporters from across the planet discussed the limits and opportunities of new media  Another topic that came up throughout the discussions was the role of online media, particularly social networking websites. Participant Thomas Deve of Zimbabwe felt that social media provided an important tool to bring people together. "Finally, they can express their thoughts on the relationship between state and society," said Deve, who coordinates the United Nations' Millennium Campaign for southern Africa. However, Tunisian blogger Lina Ben Mhenni, winner of Deutsche Welle's Best of Blogs Award, distanced herself from claims that this year's coups and upheaval in North Africa were a "Facebook revolution." "It's a revolution of the people, a revolution of dignity. In Tunisia it didn't start with the Internet but in the streets. The Internet was a tool," she said. Next year's topic: education The Global Media Forum will continue its focus on human rights next year: In July 2012 the topic for the fifth Forum will be the right to education. Women's rights in Latin America was one panel discussion topic  In terms of media attention to human rights, Portugal's Julia Galvao Alvinho believes this Forum was the beginning of an important new trend. She said it was important to her to see "human rights moving back into focus. What we observed in the past decade was that the media had gotten away from the human rights agenda. This Forum put them back in the spotlight." Author: Matthias von Hein / dl Editor: Susan Houlton


Tunisia has so far provided a positive example Tunisia's Prime Minister Hamadi Jebali visited Berlin on Wednesday. Tunisia is a valuable partner for Germany in North Africa, says DW's Daniel Scheschkewitz. German Chancellor Angela Merkel welcomed Hamadi Jebali in Berlin on Wednesday with open arms and friendly words. From a German point of view, the way that Tunisia has developed since the revolution gives cause for hope. Despite social and economic problems, Tunisia is politically stable - and that stability is a positive factor in the region. Elections were not accompanied by violent protests, as in Egypt. They were free and fair and led promptly to the formation of an undisputed government. Prime Minister Jebali made it clear in his talks with the chancellor how important this democratic process was to him. Moderate Islamist The 62-year-old, who also heads the Islamist Ennahda party which has a clear majority in parliament, took office in December. At first, many Europeans were shocked by the election results, fearing the country was on its way to becoming a religious, fundamentalist society. But since then, the prophets of doom have more or less fallen silent. Daniel Scheschkewitz Of course, there have been scuffles in movie cinemas showing sexually explicit western films; just last week at the University of Tunis, Salafists flew a banner with the Islamic statement of faith. The fact that Nabil Karoui, the owner of the Nessma private TV station, still faces legal action is alarming. He is accused of blasphemy for broadcasting the French-Iranian political cartoon "Persepolis." The film is about a young Iranian girl who struggles with and questions God. A prison sentence for Karoui would be an alarming set-back for freedom of opinion in Tunisia. The middle ground Despite these isolated cases, concern that Tunisia might turn into a religious-authoritarian society after the Islamists' election victory has not turned out to be justified. All citizens, no matter their creed, enjoy the same rights. The equality of women is due to be included in the constitution. Following the uprising in Tunisia, Germany demonstrated its confidence in the nation by cancelling the country's debts. So far, Germany has not been disappointed. The political foundations attached to the German political parties are able to work in Tunisia without harassment, thus contributing to the development of a stable democratic culture. Bikinis haven't been prohibited at Tunisian beaches, either. The people know there can only be a sustainable economic upswing if the tourists return to the beaches. Tunisia's new government is based on a broad coalition and seeks political dialogue instead of confrontation. The country has chosen the middle ground where a modern, western lifestyle coexists alongside a traditional Islamic lifestyle. Constructive role Tunisiahas also proven to be a dependable partner in the Syrian crisis. The first meeting of the West's Contact Group for Syria, which aims to coordinate the political and economic measures against the Assad regime, took place in Tunis. Tunisia, trying hard to find a political solution to the conflict, has played a constructive role in the Arab League. That includes a legitimate warning by Prime Minister Jebali against any military intervention in Syria. Tunisia may be angry at the systematic killings carried out by the Assad regime, but the country's government is well aware that NATO's action in Libya can't be duplicated in Syria. Whether, as suggested by the Tunisian president Moncef Marzouki, Tunisia would be suitable as a country of exile for Bashar al-Assad is a different story. It would be much more significant if Tunisia's own former dictator Zine El Abadine Ben Ali, who fled the country to Saudi Arabia, would return soon to face trial. A trial according to constitutional criteria would be yet another sign of Tunisia's model development - and an important signal to its Arab neighbors. Author: Daniel Scheschkewitz / db Editor: Michael Lawton


Youth revolts in Tunisia and Egypt could spread across North Africa In Tunisia, a popular uprising toppled a dictator for the first time in Arab history. Meanwhile, the largest protests in decades have broken out in Egypt. Could Morocco and Algeria be next? Tunisia's revolution triggered shockwaves not just in Egypt. Throughout the Maghreb, authoritarian regimes like those in Morocco and Algeria have a difficult time addressing the frustration and despair of their young populations. However, it is questionable whether the revolutionary example set in Tunisia can take root among its neighbors. The revolution began in the middle of December when a desperate, unemployed computer scientist named Mohamed Bouazizi set himself on fire in the small town of Sidi Bouzid. Bouazizi's death symbolized the despair of a generation, triggering a series of nationwide protests that ultimately swept longtime dictator President Ben Ali from power. "We have 13 percent unemployment but the figures in the interior of the country are significantly higher, sometimes upwards of 70 percent," said Adelwahab El Hani, a Tunisian human rights lawyer from Sidi Bouzid. "80,000 Tunisians have just finished up with their studies and they need jobs. That's an enormous challenge for the government." Pressure cooker One Tunisian student said it was like the lid had shot off of a pressure cooker. He wasn't just alluding to his homeland, but to the entire Maghreb. In Morocco, half the population is under 25 years old and 40 percent of them do not have a steady job. Young academics are especially hard hit. The grumbling in the streets has become audible. Sure, there are limited political freedoms, women's rights, a parliament and a government - but no genuine democracy. The military and secret police are omnipresent. The social inequalities are extreme. "Motives for these kinds of revolts are all over the Maghreb," said Francis Ghiles, from the Center for International Studies in Barcelona. "The elites in Morocco live the high life, but that doesn't guarantee social stability. The pie can't just belong to the rich. When there's no redistribution of wealth, when the upper class parades around arrogantly, then there will be revolt someday." In Algeria it has already reached that point. This massive land is a social powder keg. In January there were casualties during protests against high grocery prices. In many Algerian cities, the young expressed their rage in a flurry of stones, tear gas grenades and Molotov cocktails. The Algerian government remains strong despite protests this month against high food prices Algeria's government promised to take decisive action, but the country is politically stagnant. Longtime President Abdelaziz Bouteflika is supported by a corrupt clique of military officers and secret police. Three-fourths of Algerians are under 30. Most of them do not have jobs, apartments or perspective. All this despite the fact that the state coffers are full with money from oil and gas exports. "This country has accumulated 150 billion euros ($203 billion) in foreign exchange," Ghiles said. "The problem is not a lack of money, but a clientele economy. It's a casino. There's no order, no plan, no perspective. And on top of that the government is autistic. Those in power just don't listen, they don't see the problems of their people, or they simply just don't want to see." But now they have to see. A growing number of desperate, well-educated young people are dousing themselves in gasoline and lighting themselves on fire: In Egypt, in Yemen, in Mauretania and also in Algeria. Just like Mohamed Bouazizi in Tunisia, whose final act of self-determination set a whole country in flames. Domino effect? Ghiles believes that the so called "Jasmine Revolution" in Tunisia is a historic event that has shaken the entire Maghreb. However, he does not believe that it will set off a domino effect which topples the region's other authoritarian regimes. The Moroccan King Mohammed VI has a broad power base and his role as the highest religious leader of the Moroccan people lends him additional legitimacy.  Protests have gripped Morocco in the past. But King Mohammed VI's broad power base keeps him in power.  In Algeria the middle class, which played a critical role in Tunisia, has largely disappeared. There has been social unrest for years, but the regime has never been seriously threatened. The military and secret police are so tightly connected with the halls of power and the oil and natural gas industries that they have too much to lose in a revolution. In stark contrast to Tunisia, Ghiles has no doubt that the Algerian army would gun down demonstrators. And nobody wants a new civil war in Algeria - the last one cost 200,000 lives. Even if the states of the Maghreb do not fall like dominos, Tunisia serves as a warning. "When these kinds of events repeat themselves, like recently in Algeria or a few years ago in Morocco, or even in Tunisia or Egypt, then governments have to draw some conclusions," Ghiles said. "If they don't do that, then the pressure cook will explode - just somewhat later." Author: Alexander Göbel/ sk Editor: Rob Mudge


Opinion: Iran can learn from Arab protest movements The protests in Tunis and Cairo showed that the democracy movement can bring about political change. DW's Jamsheed Faroughi says Iran's opposition can learn from its counterparts in the Arab world. Iran's president Mahmoud Ahmadinejad fears his opponents. The rally to show support for Egypt's democracy movement was banned in Iran. Security forces sealed off the homes of opposition leaders Hossein Mousavi and Mahdi Karroubi, satellite programs and mobile phone networks were disrupted. In short: authorities did everything possible in order to impede the planned demonstration. But the measures were in vain. Despite threats and a massive presence of security forces, thousands of opposition activists marched through Tehran on Monday. Protests were also reported in other major cities across the country. Jamsheed Faroughi The message is clear. The new wave of demonstrations in Iran has shown quite clearly that the so-called Green Movement is alive, despite brutal force and political persecution. The calm evident on the streets in the past months is illusive and fragile. The dissatisfaction with the dominating circumstances is just as great in Iran as it is in Tunisia and Egypt. Violence and oppression are not suitable means to solve society's problems in the Middle East, either. The development in Iran also shows that despots are incapable of learning. Iran's president Ahmadinejad did not understand the signals from Cairo just as little as the Shah of Persia heard the cries for freedom and democracy 32 years ago. The Tunisian democracy movement has sparked a political earthquake in the entire region. Its offshoots are shaking the Arab world and have now reached Iran. There are differences between Tunis, Tehran and Cairo, but also many similarities. Discontent shapes the lives of the masses in this region. This discontent is not only of financial nature, but rather a complex phenomenon. It is the emergence of societies which have come of age. But they are ruled by corrupt leaders who are incapable of sensing the change and reacting to these changed circumstances. A new generation has grown up in these young societies: the Internet generation. It is open-minded and networked with like-minded counterparts worldwide. These young people compare themselves to youths from western industrial nations. That rouses great expectations. The youth in Egypt, Tunisia and Iran demand a life worth living and perspectives for the future. These are demands which cannot be ignored. The Green Movement in Iran has made its share of strategic mistakes. It waited for political and religious occasions to take to the streets. Security forces therefore had adequate time to prepare themselves for the next wave of protests. The demonstrators in Egypt, on the other hand, called their own occasion with the "day of rage." It is naïve to believe that the Egyptians and Tunisians with the expulsion of their rulers Hosni Mubarak and Zine El Abidine Ben Ali completed a revolution and achieved democratic circumstances. But they have moved a significant step in this direction. The opposition movement in Iran can and must learn from this. Only then will there also be a light at the end of the tunnel. Author: Jamsheed Faroughi, Head of Deutsche Welle's Farsi service / sac Editor: Rob Mudge


Arab filmmakers celebrate the absence of fear This year's uprisings in the Middle East have sparked interest in the Arab Film Festival Berlin, which closes Thursday. Cinema buffs looked for explanations to the Arab Spring, and found a good deal of optimism. "Ben Ali wanted to know everything about everyone, down to the last detail," says a protagonist in the Tunisian documentary "No More Fear," which featured this week at the Arab Film Festival Berlin. The Tunisian president's way of finding out everything was to instill fear, to such an extent that friends and family members no longer knew whether they could trust each other. People were arrested on trumped-up charges, accused of being terrorists or of endangering the state. Information about the events was posted online by bloggers and amateur journalists In his film, Mourad Ben Cheikh interviews a number of courageous activists, lawyers, journalists and bloggers who refused to yield to the terror. He juxtaposes the interviews with footage of the heady days of January when Tunisians took to the streets to demand the resignation of President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali and his government, and the last televised speeches of the president before he fled the country he'd ruled with an iron fist for over two decades.  Renowned Tunisian human rights lawyer Radhia Nasraoui, who defends victims of torture, tells the filmmaker how she would always check that her brakes had not been tampered with when she got into her car. She is defiant as she recalls how she refused to give into intimidation the day her office was broken into and all her files stolen, and how she danced the night away at a wedding, fully aware that the police were watching her. She laughs as she remembers her month-long hunger strike to protest against the detention of her husband, Hamma Hammami, the secretary general of the worker's communist party. He in turn smiles as he looks back on his most recent stint in jail in January when he feared he would be left behind chained to the bed as the guards took to their heels.  Although their stories are told with humor, there is a lingering sadness that so many of their activist friends did not live to see the day Ben Ali fell, the day there was "no more fear." Mohamed Boazizi provided the spark for the Arab Revolution when he set himself on fire out of despair. Zine El Abidine Ben Ali visited him in hospital shortly before being toppled from power. Everything is illegal   The absence of fear is what characterizes the new Egypt, pointed out the young filmmaker Amal Ramsis who began shooting "Forbidden" well before the January uprisings began. "We had a feeling something big was going to happen because there was so much despair, but we had not imagined this revolution," she said at the festival in Berlin. Ramsis' ironic take in the film on everything that was forbidden in Egypt was finally finished on the day the protests erupted on Cairo's Tahrir Square. "What began as an act of protest against the government has become a document since the revolution," she told Deutsche Welle. In her film, Amal Ramsis deplores the amount of checkpoints and barriers in Egypt Ramsis had deliberately decided to interview activists who were aware of the consequences and knew she was making a political statement, because it would have been too dangerous for her to go out onto the streets and talk openly about the government with strangers. She did not apply for permission to shoot on the streets, so right from the beginning she was doing something "forbidden."  One of her protagonists jokes that in Egypt you probably do between 10 and 15 forbidden things a day. Another wonders whether there is anything that is not forbidden. Holding hands in public, kissing, being out after dark, going to a museum, leaving the house without identification, meeting friends in a restaurant, not wearing a headscarf, forming a political party - practically everything falls into the category of potentially being prohibited. The emergency law, which was enacted in 1958 and has been in place almost non-stop ever since, extended police powers and legalized censorship, effectively allowing the authorities to do anything in the name of state security, including battering a blogger to death in an Internet cafe for refusing to show his ID.  One of the protestors' key demands was that the law be lifted, but this was not met. "We had hoped we could change the system but now we realize the military just wants to change the faces of the ex-regime," Ramsis said. "There is another law against strikes. The emergency law has been extended. There is a new law saying you can't criticize the military. We have the same situation, the same forbidden things. Some 13,000 people have been jailed since Mubarak's fall."  However, there is one big difference, she added, and that is that the people feel much stronger. "I am optimistic," said the filmmaker. "Millions of people are optimistic, even if we are facing a very difficult moment. We know it's a transition period and we have to be patient and it will be very long."    Normal human beings It took 18 days of protests for Mubarak to finally step down Another positive sign, Ramsis said, was that the censors had given her official permission to screen her film in Cairo. By contrast, although "18 Days," another film about the January uprisings, has received a warm welcome at Cannes and other festivals across the world, it has not been shown in Egypt. The compilation of 10 stories that were "heard, experienced or imagined" by 10 Egyptian filmmakers, who were asked in January to make a short film without a budget and without remuneration, offers a more rounded and aesthetic interpretation of the Arab Spring than the documentaries at the Berlin festival.  The stories range from the way a group of patients in a psychiatric ward reacts to the "events," to a young girl who dyes her hair and joins the protests, a young man who follows the uprisings on Facebook but doesn't get personally involved, or to people who profit from the chaos. The segment entitled "Curfew" captures the madness and uncertainty that reigned during that month of January in an ironic, touching manner. Filmmaker Sherif El Bendary told Deutsche Welle he had felt honored to be part of the project, but was not entirely sure what angle to take at first. "I thought about human beings, normal beings, and the impact of the revolution on their normal lives," he said. "That's why I came up with the very human situation of a grandfather and his grandson not being able to get home because of the curfew and the fact that the military have blocked all the roads."  Today, the filmmakers and the rest of the world are uncertain as to the long-term impact of the uprisings on the average citizens, but there seems to be a long-awaited sense of optimism. At the opening of the Arab Film Festival Berlin, Director Issam Haddad welcomed UNESCO's admittance of Palestine as an official member, saying it was a "wonderful step towards peace in the region. We hope it will no longer be the setting for killing and destruction, and that instead there will be development and reconstruction and people will have more to laugh about." Above all, the hope is that there really will be no more fear.  Author: Anne Thomas Editor: Kate Bowen


Religion plays little role so far in Arab unrest The waves of protest that have rocked Tunisia and Egypt have so far not fueled the political Islamist forces in those countries. For the US and Israel it is of vital importance that they don't do so in the future. Despite fears - and hopes - that unrest in the Middle East could lead to an Islamist revolution, the opposition appears so far not to be religiously motivated. Iranian Ayatollah Ahmad Khatami has warned that the recent events in the Middle East and the Arab world should not be underestimated. In his Friday prayer in Tehran he said there was an "Islamic Middle East in the making – based on Islam, religion and democracy." Iranian TV also broadcasted calls of solidarity "with the Tunisian and Egyptian students" and reports about demonstrations in Yemen, Jordan, Europe and the US. Comparisons are being drawn to Iran's 1979 Islamic Revolution - while present demonstrations and unrest in Iran don't get a mention. Yet so far there are no indications that there's a new "Islamic revolution" or that there's a domino effect in the entire region. While chants of "Allahu Akbar" ("Allah is great") were heard in the demonstrations against Iran's controversial 2009 election results, no such chants are being heard in Tunisia, Egypt, Yemen or Jordan. The Islamic political groups in the countries affected are keeping a low profile as the current events unfold. Tunisian Islamic opposition figure Rachid Ghanouchi, who's been in exile for 18 years, returned to Tunisia only this weekend - more than two weeks after the toppling of the old Tunisian regime. Muslim Brotherhood keeps low profile The Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt has so far not made any attempt to assume a leadership role in the protests against Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak. This may come as a surprise as the Brotherhood has long been a vocal opponent to ruling regimes across the Arab world, charging Arab leaders are corrupt, repressive and serve the interests of the West. The way to go, according to the Brotherhood, is a pan-Arab movement based on Islam. But demonstrators on the streets of Egypt seem hardly driven by such ideas. What they're fighting for is freedom, education, work and a life with dignity. It's not clear what will happen in Egypt if Mubarak heeds the call from the streets Some 40 percent Egypt's over 80 million citizens live in poverty, according the the CIA's World Factbook, while members and friends of the regime enjoy wealth and privilege. The government has in recent years tried to revive the ailing economy - but the main beneficiaries were again Egypt's multimillionaires, with the majority of the country seeing very little improvement. The number of people living in poverty is has remained on the increase. Egypt's authoritarian regime has been a welcome ally of the West that thought it needed Cairo for strategic reasons, as a mediator in the Middle East. Meanwhile, the growing problems within Egypt seemed of little concern to the international community. Unpredictable post-Mubarak future Egypt's future foreign policy remains a question mark in the event that Mubarak steps down, and it's here that Islamists might try to make their mark. Once Mubarak has left the stage, the new government could be in a position to question anything he's stood for - especially when it comes to relations with the Unites States and Israel. Egypt was the first Arab country to recognize Israel, and Mubarak has been very involved in working towards a peaceful solution to the Middle East conflict. His efforts in that field have been rewarded by Washington with billions in aid money.  What would a post-Mubarak Arab world look like?  Already, Washington has threatened to reduce that aid - and might reassess its financial commitment to Cairo if Mubarak falls, depending on who takes over. Israel is also paying close attention to the developments in neighboring Egypt. It's no secret that the 1979 Egypt-Israel Peace Treaty is unpopular among Egyptians. A shift in power could thus have an impact on relations with Israel. Should the Muslim Brotherhood take the lead in Egypt, ties to Israel could deteriorate dramatically - with consequences for the entire region. Egyptian-Israeli relations could likely change, even if Islamists do not seize power in Cairo. Even moderate liberal movements are critical of the peace treaty. Only a certain sense of continuity would sustain relations between Cairo and Tel Aviv. The fact that the new Egyptian vice president and prime minister both have military backgrounds could point toward such continuity - even though Mubarak has installed them merely to safeguard his own position. But Mubarak's power appears less and less assured amid unabated protests and calls from long-time ally the US for an "orderly transition." Though Israel's political future remains unclear, the region's shift to Islamism still seems to be far off. Author: Peter Philipp (ai) Editor: Kyle James


Opinion: Robbed of democracy Can political uprisings in Cairo and Tunis bring about democracy? It'll be tough as the fronts between secular and Islamist groups are more entrenched than ever and there is little Europe can do, says DW's Ute Schaeffer. Barriers and barbed wire are all that are preventing a fall into complete chaos: on the one side are the demonstrators pushing for a secular political system. On the other are representatives of political Islam. Until recently, the confrontation in Cairo was between the secular Tamarod campaigners and the Muslim Brotherhood. Meanwhile, groups of angry citizens have gathered in Tunis and called for the resignation of the Islamist-led government. Ute Schaeffer, DW edtior-in-chief for regionalized content What is occurring in Egypt as well as Tunisia is what many have long feared: the "cold civil war" is escalating. In Egypt, the military has quashed it - using questionable methods. Whether it can be stopped in Tunisia remains to be seen. Economically, politically and socially, this is bad news. The current violence and confrontations will cost Tunisia and Egypt years of progress. They will keep away investors and prevent a return to any real form of normality. But the particularly bad news is for democracy. The events of December 2010 in Tunisia that sparked so much hope are at risk of petering out. What was a loud call for democracy has remained an empty promise for most Egyptians and Tunisians. Changes in both countries have neither brought justice nor improved living conditions. Instead, conservative Islamist governments with little political experience have taken over in Egypt and Tunisia. Danger for the entire region What has emerged is what the dictators had stifled or covered up: the gap between rich and poor, differences between urban and rural populations, and especially the irreconcilable conflict between Islamists and secularists. The immense pressure to change and the open political system led to the societies falling apart. Three years after the shared political uprising, there is little that continues to hold them together. That poses serious risks to the entire region and for its neighbors in Europe. Tunisia is at Europe's doorstep and Egypt is a key state in the Middle East. The path both countries take will decide the political future of a strategically important region. And yet, the rest of the world is taking a cautious approach as failure threatens to engulf the democratic uprisings. Disinterested? Possibly. But mainly the response has been helplessness. As a reminder: at the end of July, 80 members of the Muslim Brotherhood were killed by the Egyptian military and there was no clear response from the Wes. The West also ignored the rapid spread of religious extremism in the countries. The former militias created to protect the revolution turned into young, violence-prone guardians of religion. They imposed an Islamic dress code and style of life and intimidated the population. The support for violent Salafists is visibly growing in both countries. Islamists in Tunisia are suspected of being behind the murders of two secular politicians. There are no good dictators The current chaos in the two countries has led some to call for a "hard" hand to take the reins. Some in Cairo and Tunisia say that the old dictators were better than the anarchy they see today. That could be the reason why when the generals took control of Egypt in the name of stability by repressing protests, imprisoning the president and putting themselves back in power, only a few people called the event what it really was: a coup. But there are no good dictators! It is a mistake to believe that autocrats or despots can provide more security or stability. At best, they create the temporary appearance of security. That is exactly what the Arab uprisings have shown. Today's chaos has been inherited from dictatorships. Dictators prevent the participation and growth of a civil society capable of taking action. Dictators smother dissent, opposition and objection. In doing so, they prevent the difficult exchange of ideas and interests that are left to suffocate under the autocratic regime. Until the pressure grows and explodes. The West also lost We've seen that kicking a dictator out of office is one thing - and building up a democratic society is another. As bitter a pill it is to swallow, it does not look like the uprisings will be successful in the foreseeable future. Democracy is the constant search for a compromise, for a common denominator. It requires reliable institutions, clear rules, tolerance and constant debate. The West has also lost out: the United States, France and Europe all supported the old dictators for decades. Neighboring Arab countries are regarded as allies despite their massive involvement in the chaos, which they use to promote their own interests. For a long time to come, Europe will have to come to terms with the region's smoldering political situation. The chaotic reorganization should be supported - but only to an extent. But the West should never make the mistake of believing in and supporting "good dictators" ever again. Ute Schaeffer is editor-in-chief of Deutsche Welle. The focus of her journalistic work is German and European foreign and development policies, as well as political, economic and social development in Africa and Eastern Europe.


Germany: Debating the Internet Unlimited access to information vs. blocking content on the Internet. Students from DW’s Master Program met with two state secretaries to debate the issue in Deutsche Welle’s broadcasting center in Bonn. In mid-May, state secretaries Hans-Jürgen Beerfeltz (Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperation and Development, BMZ) and Marc Jan Eumann (State Secretary for the Northrhine-Westfalian Minister of Federal Affairs, Europe and the Media) were invited by DW-AKADEMIE’s International Media Studies to exchange their views on “Unlimited access to information and blocking the Internet: How can democracy, human dignity and freedom of expression be maintained on the Internet?” Patrick Leusch, Head of DW-AKADEMIE's Project Development, hosted the discussion. While Hans-Jürgen Beerfeltz advocated more freedom on the Internet, Marc Jan Eumann called for more restrictions and controls. With the North African political situation in mind, Leusch opened the discussion asking about the importance of the Internet in democratic movements. The BMZ state secretary Hans-Jürgen Beerfeltz (Liberal Party, FDP) argued that the Internet had played a decisive role in the Tunisian and Egyptian revolutions. “The new media were the key to freedom there,” he said, adding it was very awkward that Germany had wanted to block content on the Internet. He said the Internet was an instrument worth protecting, referring positively to a legal framework changed in April allowing sites – especially those with child pornographic contents - to be deleted instead of blocked. Northrhine-Westfalian State Secretary Eumann (Social Democratic Party, SPD) agreed in part. “We need freedom on the Internet,” he said, but called for more self-correcting mechanisms. “The Internet needs more regulations,” he stressed. A positive example, he said, was Wikipedia where users can evaluate and question the content. But how can content - such as child pornography - be prohibited without limiting the freedom of expression? “The garbage on the Internet has to be tackled primarily in the heads of those people and not in the media,” said Beerfeltz. The fight against content like this could not be at the expense of all citizens. Eumann, however, warned that society needed to find a careful balance. He urged users – especially children and adolescents – to become media competent. The state of Northrhine-Westfalia, he said, is currently integrating this subject in the school curriculum. As of grade three, children are to acquire an interdisciplinary license in media competence.


Protesters killed in Egyptian anti-government uprising Four people died in a day of protests across Egypt inspired by Tunisia's recent uprising. Tens of thousands took to the streets demanding that President Hosni Mubarak step down from office. Police fired teargas and water cannons to disperse protesters in the Egyptian capital, Cairo, in the early hours of Wednesday after a long day of unprecendented protests across the country. Four people died during the protests, which had been energized by Tunisia's recent uprising. Tens of thousands took to the streets on Tuesday to demand that President Hosni Mubarak step aside. Two people were killed in the eastern Egyptian port city of Suez after riot police opened fire on protesters on Tuesday evening. Earlier in the day a policeman also died from injuries sustained in clashes on the streets of Cairo. A fourth man died in a Suez hospital from injuries received on Tuesday. The protests in Egypt, which organizers have vowed to carry on until dawn, are estimated to be the largest since Mubarak took power nearly 30 years ago. President Mubarak has been in power for nearly 30 years Protesters in Egypt's second largest city, Alexandria, tore down a picture of 82-year-old Mubarak and of his son, Gamal, who many Egyptians believe is being groomed for office when his father steps down. Demonstrators hung banners from buildings in Cairo reading "Revolution against oppression" and "Down with Hosni Mubarak." The United States, a close ally of Egypt and a major aid donor, called for restraint from all sides. "Our assessment is that the Egyptian government is stable and is looking for ways to respond to the legitimate needs and interests of the Egyptian people," US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton told reporters in Washington. Copycat protests The demonstrations were calculated to emulate the recent Tunisian uprising that led to President Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali being ousted from power after nearly 23 years in office. Sites such as Twitter and Facebook have been key tools for galvanizing support.  Demonstators were inspired by riots in Tunisia  "We are not less than Tunisia. Tens of thousands went out on the streets demanding their rights until the removal of the president and his escape from the country. We want our rights," organizers said in a statement on Facebook by a group called Revolution Day against Torture, Poverty, Corruption and Unemployment. Those on the streets of Cairo had the same complaints that drove Tunisians to revolt two weeks ago: rising food prices, poverty, unemployment and authoritarian rule. Many Egyptians were calling for the dissolution of parliament as well as higher wages. Others were angry about Egypt's emergency laws, which allow the police to make arrests without charge, and ban unauthorized protests. The Egyptian authorities have rejected any possibility that they might face a similar scenario to Tunisia, but they have moved to reassure the public that subsidies on basic commodities will remain in place. Around 40 percent of Egypt's 80-million-strong population - equivalent to the population of Germany - live on as little as two dollars per day, and many people rely on subsidized goods. Dozens were arrested throughout the country on Tuesday. Riot police used sticks, tear gas and water cannons to try to disperse the crowds, injuring hundreds. Nationwide unrest The demonstrations began around midday with hundreds gathering in north Sinai, blocking the road leading to the airport used by multinational peacekeeping forces. Meanwhile, the Muslim Brotherhood, one of Egypt's largest opposition groups, reported that thousands of protesters were gathered in the coastal city of Alexandria.  Protesters clashed with riot police on the streets of Cairo  The Interior Ministry blamed the Brotherhood for provoking the riot and inciting chaos. They said people were allowed to organize "peaceful protests." In Cairo, thousands marched and carried flags along the city's main streets, until they reached the central Tahrir Square. By nightfall, security forces had failed to disperse the crowds, despite the use of force. The protest - planned in at least 16 cities nationwide - was organized by over a dozen non-governmental organizations and rights groups, which described it as a "Day of Wrath." Author: Joanna Impey (AFP, dpa, Reuters) Editor: Matt Zuvela


Third boatload of migrants from Libya in 24 hours arrives on Malta As the conflict in Libya continues to rage, another boatload of migrants fleeing the violence has arrived on the Mediterranean island of Malta. Together with Italy, Malta is housing thousands of North African migrants. A boatload of 281 migrants from Libya arrived on the small Mediterranean island of Malta late Tuesday, according to local media, bringing the total number of irregular arrivals to the EU member state to more than 800 in the last 24 hours. The boats were believed to have sailed from the Libyan capital, Tripoli, and were picked up by Maltese escort boats and guided to Cirkewwa port on the northern tip of the island, the Times of Malta daily reported. Melissa Fleming, spokeswoman for the UN’s refugee agency UNHCR, said migrants on the most-recently arrived vessel were mainly Eritreans and Somalis who had fled the ongoing violence in Libya as forces loyal to Moammar Gadhafi continued to battle rebels being supported by the Western military alliance, NATO. She said there were "many women and children among them, but there are also Ethiopians, Sudanese and a number of other nationalities. To date, Libyans do not appear to be among those arriving..." Malta has just under half a million inhabitants Facilities overstretched "UNHCR is grateful to Italy and Malta for their reception of the new arrivals from Libya and urges other European Union countries to demonstrate solidarity with these frontline countries," Fleming said. Most of the migrants are being kept in the detention centers in Hal Far and Safi, while families are being kept in open centers. Fleming added that plans were being discussed with Italian and Maltese authorities and the International Red Cross on how to deal with the possible arrival of more people fleeing Libya. The UNHCR has issued a warning that refugee centers on Malta were being "stretched." It said more than 2,000 non-Libyan migrants had arrived in Malta and Italy from Tripoli since the outbreak of conflict there. Malta has a population of around 400,000. The Italian island of Lampedusa, meanwhile, was struggling to cope with over 6,000 Tunisian migrants who have fled revolution back home. The island has a population of only around 5,000. Author: Darren Mara (Reuters, dpa) Editor: Rob Turner


Assad's all-or-nothing fight Syria's President Bashar Assad is talking about a final battle instead of fleeing into safe exile. He is most likely sealing his own fate. Since the July 18 attack that killed several of his key aides, Syrian President Bashar Assad has disappeared from public view. He's on TV at the swearing-in of new ministers, he's quoted with statements condemning the rebels. Other than that there's only silence. Instead of addressing his people, he lets the guns do the talking. In the country's two most important cities, Damascus and Aleppo, both the regime and the rebels are talking of the "final battle." And this is Bashar Assad, of all people. The man who never wanted to become president in the first place. The man who only took over from his father because his older brother Basel died in a 1994 car crash. Bashar studied to become an eye doctor and was interested in computers. Now it is he who is determined to stay in power, whatever the cost - even if it means killing his own people. Violence instead of dialogue An end to the violence in Syria is getting less and less likely Yet out of all Arab authoritarian rulers, Assad was in the best position. While the anger of Tunisians, Egyptians and Libyans was clearly directed at their leaders, Syrians demanded freedom, democracy and an end to corruption. But instead of seeking dialogue with the demonstrators, Assad decided to let his army shoot at them - and started the armed conflict that's still going on. For months, the opposition was ready to talk with the regime about a democratic transition. Their only demand was that the violence against the protesters had to stop. But over the last eighteen months, Assad never really stopped the killing to give negotiations a chance. He went down another path: a fight for all or nothing. It's a risky game; after all, the 46-year-old has a family, and his life is still ahead of him. He knows that many Syrians will not rest until he pays for his crimes - either in prison or with a public execution. His support among the people is dwindling by the day. The pro-Assad demonstrations in recent months are nothing like they still used to be in the summer of 2011. It's getting more and more difficult to mobilize the public and even staying at home instead of joining the pro-Assad demonstration has a political aspect to it. Many people might still be too frightened to protest against the regime but at least they won't be forced into demonstrating in favor of it. Most people who for years had been waiting for improvements under Assad were already disappointed before the revolution started. They are the neglected rural population, the impoverished suburban class, the university students without job prospects, the countless unemployed young people. And since the beginning of the protests, even the businessmen and public servants who fared comparatively well under the Assad regime are beginning to turn away from Bashar. A life-and-death struggle Syria's former Prime Minister Riyad Hijab defected to Jordan Assad still manages to survive, partly because he's not alone. A close circle of largely Alawite officers and secret service generals as well as his extended family are bound to stick with him to the bitter end. Their fate is tied to the regime as they supported the killing in recent months. It's this core of the regime who are fighting for their lives no matter what the price. But since the July 18 attack, Assad himself has become vulnerable. The armed opposition seems to have supporters in the highest circles around the president and will do anything to get the hated strongman out of the way. This will have a psychological effect on Assad: Where does he still feel safe? Whom can he still trust? The fighting in Damascus and Aleppo shows that the conflict is getting ever bloodier. The economic situation at in the country is getting worse, while more and more members of the security apparatus and the administration are jumping ship. Politicians, ambassadors and members of the military who have switched sides all paint a picture of an ailing regime frantically punching left and right as it knows that its time is up. The question is how long it still can hold out.


Renewed protests in Algeria and Tunisia as Arab unrest spreads Protests continued in Algeria and Yemen on Saturday as Tunisia's old regime faced mounting pressure to quit. Demonstrators in Tunis were joined by hundreds of police officers. Police clashed with pro-democracy protesters in the Algerian capital Algiers on Saturday, leaving multiple casualties, as they blocked a march on parliament that had fueled fears of Tunisia-style unrest. The opposition said at least 42 people had been injured during the clashes, including two seriously. The Interior Ministry put the number of injured at 19, including 11 protestors or passers-by, and eight police. Said Sadi, the head of the opposition Rally for Culture and Democracy (RCD), said the protest was organized in defiance of a government ban. Around 300 people had gathered for the rally, intending to march from the city's Place de la Concorde to the parliament building, but they were quickly blockaded by police armed with batons and tear gas, which prevented the group from moving for six hours before it dispersed. The Algerian League for the Defense of Human Rights (LADDH) said Saturday the blanket government ban on peaceful protest could cause social upheaval in the North African country. "The fact of banning peaceful marches undertaken by the parties and civil society is leading us towards an explosion," the group's president Mostefa Bouchachi told the AFP news agency. Arab unrest  Yemeni protestors also took to the streets last week in support of the Tunisian uprising As unrest continued to simmer in Algeria, hundreds of Yemeni students held protests at Sanaa University, with some calling for the president to step down, and others for him to stay in office. Protesters have frequently called for an end to President Ali Abdullah Saleh's decades-long rule since the Tunisian uprising. "No to inheritance, no to extension, learn from the Jasmine Revolution," read a banner carried by the students, in reference to the events in Tunisia that have become known by that name. Saleh was reelected in September 2006 for a seven-year mandate. A draft amendment of the constitution, under discussion in parliament despite opposition protests, could further stretch his tenure by allowing a lifelong mandate. In Egypt, a national day of action is scheduled for next Tuesday by opponents of the 29-year regime led by President Hosni Mubarak. "If the Tunisians have done it, Egyptians should get there too," Mohammed ElBaradei, a leading opposition figure and 2005 Nobel Peace Prize winner, told German news magazine Der Spiegel for an interview to be published Monday. Police officers joined demonstrations in Tunisia Police join protesters Meanwhile, in Tunisia interim Prime Minister Mohamed Ghannouchi hosted cabinet meetings at his office in the capital, Tunis, on Saturday. Thousands of people rallied, calling on their new government to quit because of its inclusion of old regime figures in key posts, including Ghannouchi as well as the defense, interior and foreign ministers. It comes in the midst of a three-day mourning period for scores killed in the popular revolt that toppled the regime. Demonstrators in Tunis were joined by hundreds of police officers, who said they were not responsible for the bloody crackdown against protests that ultimately led to the ousting of President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali. Some of the officers briefly blocked a car carrying interim President Foued Mebazaa, the speaker of parliament, but it was later allowed to pass. Public assemblies of more than three people are officially banned under a state of emergency that remains in place along with a nighttime curfew. Also Saturday, a protest march backed by the main UGTT trade union, which has played an instrumental role in the recent upheaval, set off from central Tunisia headed for the capital with hundreds of local residents taking part in a bid to topple the interim government . The demonstrators called their protest a "Caravan of Liberation" and spent their first night in the town of Regueb, 265 kilometers south of Tunis, and said their march would gain momentum as it moved toward the capital. Author: Natalia Dannenberg (dpa, Reuters, AFP) Editor: Martin Kuebler


Italy protests after France blocks trains in migrant spat France temporarily stopped a passenger train from neighboring Italy to prevent North African migrants from entering the country on visas issued by Italian authorities. The move highlights a growing row over migration. An immigration spat between Rome and Paris escalated on Sunday when France blocked Italian passenger trains from entering the country. France later permitted the train to enter its territory. Both countries tightened immigration controls in recent weeks, fearing an influx of northern African migrants fleeing the revolutions and fighting in Libya, Tunisia and Egypt. Italy has borne the brunt of a wave of migrants fleeing across the Mediterranean Sea in rickety boats and landing on the island of Lampedusa. Italian Foreign Minister Franco Frattini told his embassy in Paris to lodge a strong protest with the French government. He said Rome wanted "clarification" on the measures which he said appeared to be illegal and in clear violation of European principles. Hot-button issue Rome has repeatedly asked the European Union for help in dealing with an influx of migrants, but with little aid forthcoming Italy decided to issue six-month visas to the incoming migrants. The visas allow holders to enter other countries in the so-called Schengen zone of visa-free travel.  Some 330 Tunisian migrants were repatriated, the Italian Interior Minister Roberto Maroni said A group of Italian and French activists on Sunday had planned to board what they dubbed "The Train of Dignity" to accompany migrants with visas into France to protest Europe's measures to shut down its borders despite the Schengen agreement. While Schengen citizens enjoy freedom of movement, migrants and refugees from outside the area are supposed to declare themselves in the first European state they enter. The French authorities said they would allow in only Tunisians with passports and the financial resources to live in France independently. The Italian newspaper La Repubblica reported that Rome was not demanding a passport before handing out visas and was set to issue about 100 documents a day. The spirit of Schengen EU President Herman van Rompuy admitted there was a problem but warned member states on Sunday not to exaggerate the threat of illegal immigration from North Africa. "Of course there is a risk of migration, but we must not exaggerate it," he said. "Neither Italy, nor France has yet done anything illegal. That said, there is a danger of their not respecting the spirit of the Schengen treaty on free movement," he said. Other Mediterranean states, like Malta, Greece, Cyprus and Spain, also have sounded the alarm about a rising tide of migrants fleeing the political crises in North Africa. In Germany, Bavarian Interior Minister Joachim Herrmann also criticized Italian officials. In an interview with the Passauer Neuen Presse newspaper, he said he understood why the French were upset and added that Italians' decision to issue visas went against the spirit and principles of the Schengen agreement. Under the Schengen agreement passport controls were lifted between many core EU states - including France, Italy and Germany. Author: Gregg Benzow (dpa, ap, AFP) Editor: Sean Sinico


Quadriga 2011 - Year of Crisis, Year of Hope Arab Spring 
14 January 2011: After weeks of public unrest, Tunisia became the first Arab nation to oust its dictator. President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali fled to Saudi Arabia. The Tunisian revolution sparked the Arab Spring, with uprisings in Egypt, Yemen and a civil war in Libya. The era of the dictators may be over, but what follows?  
 
 

Nuclear Disaster 
11 March 2011: A magnitude nine earthquake shook Japan, causing a tsunami that flooded coastal regions, claiming more than 10,000 lives. The quake and tsunami caused major damage to the Fukushima nuclear power plant, disabling the reactor cooling systems, and causing nuclear meltdowns which led to radioactive releases. German Chancellor Angela Merkel, until then a friend of nuclear power, announced that the Fukushima disaster had changed her attitude to nuclear energy. On 30 June the Bundestag approved a plan to phase out German nuclear power plants. The energy turnabout in Germany – can it succeed? 

Eurozone Debt Crisis 
7 April 2011: After Greece and Ireland, Portugal became the next Eurozone country to ask for an EU bailout. The debt crisis had begun to spread. Chancellor Merkel warned that a failure of the euro meant failure for Europe. Germany’s share of guarantees for the rescue fund rose from 123 to 211 billion euros. On 9 December an attempt to reach a deal on the Eurozone rescue through EU treaty changes failed when Britain refused to cooperate. When will we see an end to the crisis? 
What do you think: 2011 - Year of Crisis, Year of Hope? 
Write us at: Quadriga@dw-world.de 
Our guests: 

Samir Said - Has been living and working as a freelance journalist in Germany for the last five years. Born in Egypt, he studied at Cairo’s Ain Shams University. In 2004 he and his family relocated to Germany, his wife’s home country. He works for Arabic and English medias. He is presently working as a consultant, assisting European media to gain a foothold in the Arab World.  

Ulrike Herrmann – started her career in banking before taking up journalism at the Henri Nannen School afterwards studying history and philosophy at Berlin’s Free University. She then worked as a research assistant at the Körber Foundation and was the press officer for Hamburg’s Equal Opportunities minister, Krista Sager. In 2000 she became a political correspondent and business editor at the Berlin daily "taz". These days she is the responsible editor for the opinion page of this newspaper.  

Nicholas Kulish was born in Washington in 1975 and raised in Arlington, Virginia. He graduated from Columbia College in New York with a bachelor’s of arts degree. He worked a series of odd writing and Internet jobs in Hong Kong and New York before landing as a news assistant at The Wall Street Journal. He worked his way up to staff reporter in the paper’s Washington bureau, covering everything from economics to the presidential recount in Florida following the 2000 election. Kulish embedded with a Marine helicopter squadron for the invasion of Iraq. He left the Journal to take a Fulbright creative-writing grant in Berlin, where he wrote a novel set during the opening weeks of the Iraq war, called Last One In. He spent two years on The New York Times editorial board, before moving back to Berlin in August 2007 to become the paper’s Berlin bureau chief. 14 January 2011: After weeks of public unrest, Tunisia became the first Arab nation to oust its dictator. President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali fled to Saudi Arabia. The Tunisian revolution sparked the Arab Spring, with uprisings in Egypt, Yemen and a civil war in Libya. The era of the dictators may be over, but what follows?  
 
 

Nuclear Disaster 
11 March 2011: A magnitude nine earthquake shook Japan, causing a tsunami that flooded coastal regions, claiming more than 10,000 lives. The quake and tsunami caused major damage to the Fukushima nuclear power plant, disabling the reactor cooling systems, and causing nuclear meltdowns which led to radioactive releases. German Chancellor Angela Merkel, until then a friend of nuclear power, announced that the Fukushima disaster had changed her attitude to nuclear energy. On 30 June the Bundestag approved a plan to phase out German nuclear power plants. The energy turnabout in Germany – can it succeed? 

Eurozone Debt Crisis 
7 April 2011: After Greece and Ireland, Portugal became the next Eurozone country to ask for an EU bailout. The debt crisis had begun to spread. Chancellor Merkel warned that a failure of the euro meant failure for Europe. Germany’s share of guarantees for the rescue fund rose from 123 to 211 billion euros. On 9 December an attempt to reach a deal on the Eurozone rescue through EU treaty changes failed when Britain refused to cooperate. When will we see an end to the crisis? 
What do you think: 2011 - Year of Crisis, Year of Hope? 
Write us at: Quadriga@dw-world.de 
Our guests: 

Samir Said - Has been living and working as a freelance journalist in Germany for the last five years. Born in Egypt, he studied at Cairo’s Ain Shams University. In 2004 he and his family relocated to Germany, his wife’s home country. He works for Arabic and English medias. He is presently working as a consultant, assisting European media to gain a foothold in the Arab World.  

Ulrike Herrmann – started her career in banking before taking up journalism at the Henri Nannen School afterwards studying history and philosophy at Berlin’s Free University. She then worked as a research assistant at the Körber Foundation and was the press officer for Hamburg’s Equal Opportunities minister, Krista Sager. In 2000 she became a political correspondent and business editor at the Berlin daily "taz". These days she is the responsible editor for the opinion page of this newspaper.  

Nicholas Kulish was born in Washington in 1975 and raised in Arlington, Virginia. He graduated from Columbia College in New York with a bachelor’s of arts degree. He worked a series of odd writing and Internet jobs in Hong Kong and New York before landing as a news assistant at The Wall Street Journal. He worked his way up to staff reporter in the paper’s Washington bureau, covering everything from economics to the presidential recount in Florida following the 2000 election. Kulish embedded with a Marine helicopter squadron for the invasion of Iraq. He left the Journal to take a Fulbright creative-writing grant in Berlin, where he wrote a novel set during the opening weeks of the Iraq war, called Last One In. He spent two years on The New York Times editorial board, before moving back to Berlin in August 2007 to become the paper’s Berlin bureau chief. Nuclear Disaster 
11 March 2011: A magnitude nine earthquake shook Japan, causing a tsunami that flooded coastal regions, claiming more than 10,000 lives. The quake and tsunami caused major damage to the Fukushima nuclear power plant, disabling the reactor cooling systems, and causing nuclear meltdowns which led to radioactive releases. German Chancellor Angela Merkel, until then a friend of nuclear power, announced that the Fukushima disaster had changed her attitude to nuclear energy. On 30 June the Bundestag approved a plan to phase out German nuclear power plants. The energy turnabout in Germany – can it succeed? 

Eurozone Debt Crisis 
7 April 2011: After Greece and Ireland, Portugal became the next Eurozone country to ask for an EU bailout. The debt crisis had begun to spread. Chancellor Merkel warned that a failure of the euro meant failure for Europe. Germany’s share of guarantees for the rescue fund rose from 123 to 211 billion euros. On 9 December an attempt to reach a deal on the Eurozone rescue through EU treaty changes failed when Britain refused to cooperate. When will we see an end to the crisis? 
What do you think: 2011 - Year of Crisis, Year of Hope? 
Write us at: Quadriga@dw-world.de 
Our guests: 

Samir Said - Has been living and working as a freelance journalist in Germany for the last five years. Born in Egypt, he studied at Cairo’s Ain Shams University. In 2004 he and his family relocated to Germany, his wife’s home country. He works for Arabic and English medias. He is presently working as a consultant, assisting European media to gain a foothold in the Arab World.  

Ulrike Herrmann – started her career in banking before taking up journalism at the Henri Nannen School afterwards studying history and philosophy at Berlin’s Free University. She then worked as a research assistant at the Körber Foundation and was the press officer for Hamburg’s Equal Opportunities minister, Krista Sager. In 2000 she became a political correspondent and business editor at the Berlin daily "taz". These days she is the responsible editor for the opinion page of this newspaper.  

Nicholas Kulish was born in Washington in 1975 and raised in Arlington, Virginia. He graduated from Columbia College in New York with a bachelor’s of arts degree. He worked a series of odd writing and Internet jobs in Hong Kong and New York before landing as a news assistant at The Wall Street Journal. He worked his way up to staff reporter in the paper’s Washington bureau, covering everything from economics to the presidential recount in Florida following the 2000 election. Kulish embedded with a Marine helicopter squadron for the invasion of Iraq. He left the Journal to take a Fulbright creative-writing grant in Berlin, where he wrote a novel set during the opening weeks of the Iraq war, called Last One In. He spent two years on The New York Times editorial board, before moving back to Berlin in August 2007 to become the paper’s Berlin bureau chief. Nuclear Disaster 
11 March 2011: A magnitude nine earthquake shook Japan, causing a tsunami that flooded coastal regions, claiming more than 10,000 lives. The quake and tsunami caused major damage to the Fukushima nuclear power plant, disabling the reactor cooling systems, and causing nuclear meltdowns which led to radioactive releases. German Chancellor Angela Merkel, until then a friend of nuclear power, announced that the Fukushima disaster had changed her attitude to nuclear energy. On 30 June the Bundestag approved a plan to phase out German nuclear power plants. The energy turnabout in Germany – can it succeed? 

Eurozone Debt Crisis 
7 April 2011: After Greece and Ireland, Portugal became the next Eurozone country to ask for an EU bailout. The debt crisis had begun to spread. Chancellor Merkel warned that a failure of the euro meant failure for Europe. Germany’s share of guarantees for the rescue fund rose from 123 to 211 billion euros. On 9 December an attempt to reach a deal on the Eurozone rescue through EU treaty changes failed when Britain refused to cooperate. When will we see an end to the crisis? 
What do you think: 2011 - Year of Crisis, Year of Hope? 
Write us at: Quadriga@dw-world.de 
Our guests: 

Samir Said - Has been living and working as a freelance journalist in Germany for the last five years. Born in Egypt, he studied at Cairo’s Ain Shams University. In 2004 he and his family relocated to Germany, his wife’s home country. He works for Arabic and English medias. He is presently working as a consultant, assisting European media to gain a foothold in the Arab World.  

Ulrike Herrmann – started her career in banking before taking up journalism at the Henri Nannen School afterwards studying history and philosophy at Berlin’s Free University. She then worked as a research assistant at the Körber Foundation and was the press officer for Hamburg’s Equal Opportunities minister, Krista Sager. In 2000 she became a political correspondent and business editor at the Berlin daily "taz". These days she is the responsible editor for the opinion page of this newspaper.  

Nicholas Kulish was born in Washington in 1975 and raised in Arlington, Virginia. He graduated from Columbia College in New York with a bachelor’s of arts degree. He worked a series of odd writing and Internet jobs in Hong Kong and New York before landing as a news assistant at The Wall Street Journal. He worked his way up to staff reporter in the paper’s Washington bureau, covering everything from economics to the presidential recount in Florida following the 2000 election. Kulish embedded with a Marine helicopter squadron for the invasion of Iraq. He left the Journal to take a Fulbright creative-writing grant in Berlin, where he wrote a novel set during the opening weeks of the Iraq war, called Last One In. He spent two years on The New York Times editorial board, before moving back to Berlin in August 2007 to become the paper’s Berlin bureau chief. Nuclear Disaster 
11 March 2011: A magnitude nine earthquake shook Japan, causing a tsunami that flooded coastal regions, claiming more than 10,000 lives. The quake and tsunami caused major damage to the Fukushima nuclear power plant, disabling the reactor cooling systems, and causing nuclear meltdowns which led to radioactive releases. German Chancellor Angela Merkel, until then a friend of nuclear power, announced that the Fukushima disaster had changed her attitude to nuclear energy. On 30 June the Bundestag approved a plan to phase out German nuclear power plants. The energy turnabout in Germany – can it succeed? 

Eurozone Debt Crisis 
7 April 2011: After Greece and Ireland, Portugal became the next Eurozone country to ask for an EU bailout. The debt crisis had begun to spread. Chancellor Merkel warned that a failure of the euro meant failure for Europe. Germany’s share of guarantees for the rescue fund rose from 123 to 211 billion euros. On 9 December an attempt to reach a deal on the Eurozone rescue through EU treaty changes failed when Britain refused to cooperate. When will we see an end to the crisis? 
What do you think: 2011 - Year of Crisis, Year of Hope? 
Write us at: Quadriga@dw-world.de 
Our guests: 

Samir Said - Has been living and working as a freelance journalist in Germany for the last five years. Born in Egypt, he studied at Cairo’s Ain Shams University. In 2004 he and his family relocated to Germany, his wife’s home country. He works for Arabic and English medias. He is presently working as a consultant, assisting European media to gain a foothold in the Arab World.  

Ulrike Herrmann – started her career in banking before taking up journalism at the Henri Nannen School afterwards studying history and philosophy at Berlin’s Free University. She then worked as a research assistant at the Körber Foundation and was the press officer for Hamburg’s Equal Opportunities minister, Krista Sager. In 2000 she became a political correspondent and business editor at the Berlin daily "taz". These days she is the responsible editor for the opinion page of this newspaper.  

Nicholas Kulish was born in Washington in 1975 and raised in Arlington, Virginia. He graduated from Columbia College in New York with a bachelor’s of arts degree. He worked a series of odd writing and Internet jobs in Hong Kong and New York before landing as a news assistant at The Wall Street Journal. He worked his way up to staff reporter in the paper’s Washington bureau, covering everything from economics to the presidential recount in Florida following the 2000 election. Kulish embedded with a Marine helicopter squadron for the invasion of Iraq. He left the Journal to take a Fulbright creative-writing grant in Berlin, where he wrote a novel set during the opening weeks of the Iraq war, called Last One In. He spent two years on The New York Times editorial board, before moving back to Berlin in August 2007 to become the paper’s Berlin bureau chief. 11 March 2011: A magnitude nine earthquake shook Japan, causing a tsunami that flooded coastal regions, claiming more than 10,000 lives. The quake and tsunami caused major damage to the Fukushima nuclear power plant, disabling the reactor cooling systems, and causing nuclear meltdowns which led to radioactive releases. German Chancellor Angela Merkel, until then a friend of nuclear power, announced that the Fukushima disaster had changed her attitude to nuclear energy. On 30 June the Bundestag approved a plan to phase out German nuclear power plants. The energy turnabout in Germany – can it succeed? 

Eurozone Debt Crisis 
7 April 2011: After Greece and Ireland, Portugal became the next Eurozone country to ask for an EU bailout. The debt crisis had begun to spread. Chancellor Merkel warned that a failure of the euro meant failure for Europe. Germany’s share of guarantees for the rescue fund rose from 123 to 211 billion euros. On 9 December an attempt to reach a deal on the Eurozone rescue through EU treaty changes failed when Britain refused to cooperate. When will we see an end to the crisis? 
What do you think: 2011 - Year of Crisis, Year of Hope? 
Write us at: Quadriga@dw-world.de 
Our guests: 

Samir Said - Has been living and working as a freelance journalist in Germany for the last five years. Born in Egypt, he studied at Cairo’s Ain Shams University. In 2004 he and his family relocated to Germany, his wife’s home country. He works for Arabic and English medias. He is presently working as a consultant, assisting European media to gain a foothold in the Arab World.  

Ulrike Herrmann – started her career in banking before taking up journalism at the Henri Nannen School afterwards studying history and philosophy at Berlin’s Free University. She then worked as a research assistant at the Körber Foundation and was the press officer for Hamburg’s Equal Opportunities minister, Krista Sager. In 2000 she became a political correspondent and business editor at the Berlin daily "taz". These days she is the responsible editor for the opinion page of this newspaper.  

Nicholas Kulish was born in Washington in 1975 and raised in Arlington, Virginia. He graduated from Columbia College in New York with a bachelor’s of arts degree. He worked a series of odd writing and Internet jobs in Hong Kong and New York before landing as a news assistant at The Wall Street Journal. He worked his way up to staff reporter in the paper’s Washington bureau, covering everything from economics to the presidential recount in Florida following the 2000 election. Kulish embedded with a Marine helicopter squadron for the invasion of Iraq. He left the Journal to take a Fulbright creative-writing grant in Berlin, where he wrote a novel set during the opening weeks of the Iraq war, called Last One In. He spent two years on The New York Times editorial board, before moving back to Berlin in August 2007 to become the paper’s Berlin bureau chief. Eurozone Debt Crisis 
7 April 2011: After Greece and Ireland, Portugal became the next Eurozone country to ask for an EU bailout. The debt crisis had begun to spread. Chancellor Merkel warned that a failure of the euro meant failure for Europe. Germany’s share of guarantees for the rescue fund rose from 123 to 211 billion euros. On 9 December an attempt to reach a deal on the Eurozone rescue through EU treaty changes failed when Britain refused to cooperate. When will we see an end to the crisis? 
What do you think: 2011 - Year of Crisis, Year of Hope? 
Write us at: Quadriga@dw-world.de 
Our guests: 

Samir Said - Has been living and working as a freelance journalist in Germany for the last five years. Born in Egypt, he studied at Cairo’s Ain Shams University. In 2004 he and his family relocated to Germany, his wife’s home country. He works for Arabic and English medias. He is presently working as a consultant, assisting European media to gain a foothold in the Arab World.  

Ulrike Herrmann – started her career in banking before taking up journalism at the Henri Nannen School afterwards studying history and philosophy at Berlin’s Free University. She then worked as a research assistant at the Körber Foundation and was the press officer for Hamburg’s Equal Opportunities minister, Krista Sager. In 2000 she became a political correspondent and business editor at the Berlin daily "taz". These days she is the responsible editor for the opinion page of this newspaper.  

Nicholas Kulish was born in Washington in 1975 and raised in Arlington, Virginia. He graduated from Columbia College in New York with a bachelor’s of arts degree. He worked a series of odd writing and Internet jobs in Hong Kong and New York before landing as a news assistant at The Wall Street Journal. He worked his way up to staff reporter in the paper’s Washington bureau, covering everything from economics to the presidential recount in Florida following the 2000 election. Kulish embedded with a Marine helicopter squadron for the invasion of Iraq. He left the Journal to take a Fulbright creative-writing grant in Berlin, where he wrote a novel set during the opening weeks of the Iraq war, called Last One In. He spent two years on The New York Times editorial board, before moving back to Berlin in August 2007 to become the paper’s Berlin bureau chief. 7 April 2011: After Greece and Ireland, Portugal became the next Eurozone country to ask for an EU bailout. The debt crisis had begun to spread. Chancellor Merkel warned that a failure of the euro meant failure for Europe. Germany’s share of guarantees for the rescue fund rose from 123 to 211 billion euros. On 9 December an attempt to reach a deal on the Eurozone rescue through EU treaty changes failed when Britain refused to cooperate. When will we see an end to the crisis? 
What do you think: 2011 - Year of Crisis, Year of Hope? 
Write us at: Quadriga@dw-world.de 
Our guests: 

Samir Said - Has been living and working as a freelance journalist in Germany for the last five years. Born in Egypt, he studied at Cairo’s Ain Shams University. In 2004 he and his family relocated to Germany, his wife’s home country. He works for Arabic and English medias. He is presently working as a consultant, assisting European media to gain a foothold in the Arab World.  

Ulrike Herrmann – started her career in banking before taking up journalism at the Henri Nannen School afterwards studying history and philosophy at Berlin’s Free University. She then worked as a research assistant at the Körber Foundation and was the press officer for Hamburg’s Equal Opportunities minister, Krista Sager. In 2000 she became a political correspondent and business editor at the Berlin daily "taz". These days she is the responsible editor for the opinion page of this newspaper.  

Nicholas Kulish was born in Washington in 1975 and raised in Arlington, Virginia. He graduated from Columbia College in New York with a bachelor’s of arts degree. He worked a series of odd writing and Internet jobs in Hong Kong and New York before landing as a news assistant at The Wall Street Journal. He worked his way up to staff reporter in the paper’s Washington bureau, covering everything from economics to the presidential recount in Florida following the 2000 election. Kulish embedded with a Marine helicopter squadron for the invasion of Iraq. He left the Journal to take a Fulbright creative-writing grant in Berlin, where he wrote a novel set during the opening weeks of the Iraq war, called Last One In. He spent two years on The New York Times editorial board, before moving back to Berlin in August 2007 to become the paper’s Berlin bureau chief. What do you think: 2011 - Year of Crisis, Year of Hope? 
Write us at: Quadriga@dw-world.de 
Our guests: 

Samir Said - Has been living and working as a freelance journalist in Germany for the last five years. Born in Egypt, he studied at Cairo’s Ain Shams University. In 2004 he and his family relocated to Germany, his wife’s home country. He works for Arabic and English medias. He is presently working as a consultant, assisting European media to gain a foothold in the Arab World.  

Ulrike Herrmann – started her career in banking before taking up journalism at the Henri Nannen School afterwards studying history and philosophy at Berlin’s Free University. She then worked as a research assistant at the Körber Foundation and was the press officer for Hamburg’s Equal Opportunities minister, Krista Sager. In 2000 she became a political correspondent and business editor at the Berlin daily "taz". These days she is the responsible editor for the opinion page of this newspaper.  

Nicholas Kulish was born in Washington in 1975 and raised in Arlington, Virginia. He graduated from Columbia College in New York with a bachelor’s of arts degree. He worked a series of odd writing and Internet jobs in Hong Kong and New York before landing as a news assistant at The Wall Street Journal. He worked his way up to staff reporter in the paper’s Washington bureau, covering everything from economics to the presidential recount in Florida following the 2000 election. Kulish embedded with a Marine helicopter squadron for the invasion of Iraq. He left the Journal to take a Fulbright creative-writing grant in Berlin, where he wrote a novel set during the opening weeks of the Iraq war, called Last One In. He spent two years on The New York Times editorial board, before moving back to Berlin in August 2007 to become the paper’s Berlin bureau chief. Write us at: Quadriga@dw-world.de 
Our guests: 

Samir Said - Has been living and working as a freelance journalist in Germany for the last five years. Born in Egypt, he studied at Cairo’s Ain Shams University. In 2004 he and his family relocated to Germany, his wife’s home country. He works for Arabic and English medias. He is presently working as a consultant, assisting European media to gain a foothold in the Arab World.  

Ulrike Herrmann – started her career in banking before taking up journalism at the Henri Nannen School afterwards studying history and philosophy at Berlin’s Free University. She then worked as a research assistant at the Körber Foundation and was the press officer for Hamburg’s Equal Opportunities minister, Krista Sager. In 2000 she became a political correspondent and business editor at the Berlin daily "taz". These days she is the responsible editor for the opinion page of this newspaper.  

Nicholas Kulish was born in Washington in 1975 and raised in Arlington, Virginia. He graduated from Columbia College in New York with a bachelor’s of arts degree. He worked a series of odd writing and Internet jobs in Hong Kong and New York before landing as a news assistant at The Wall Street Journal. He worked his way up to staff reporter in the paper’s Washington bureau, covering everything from economics to the presidential recount in Florida following the 2000 election. Kulish embedded with a Marine helicopter squadron for the invasion of Iraq. He left the Journal to take a Fulbright creative-writing grant in Berlin, where he wrote a novel set during the opening weeks of the Iraq war, called Last One In. He spent two years on The New York Times editorial board, before moving back to Berlin in August 2007 to become the paper’s Berlin bureau chief. Our guests: 

Samir Said - Has been living and working as a freelance journalist in Germany for the last five years. Born in Egypt, he studied at Cairo’s Ain Shams University. In 2004 he and his family relocated to Germany, his wife’s home country. He works for Arabic and English medias. He is presently working as a consultant, assisting European media to gain a foothold in the Arab World.  

Ulrike Herrmann – started her career in banking before taking up journalism at the Henri Nannen School afterwards studying history and philosophy at Berlin’s Free University. She then worked as a research assistant at the Körber Foundation and was the press officer for Hamburg’s Equal Opportunities minister, Krista Sager. In 2000 she became a political correspondent and business editor at the Berlin daily "taz". These days she is the responsible editor for the opinion page of this newspaper.  

Nicholas Kulish was born in Washington in 1975 and raised in Arlington, Virginia. He graduated from Columbia College in New York with a bachelor’s of arts degree. He worked a series of odd writing and Internet jobs in Hong Kong and New York before landing as a news assistant at The Wall Street Journal. He worked his way up to staff reporter in the paper’s Washington bureau, covering everything from economics to the presidential recount in Florida following the 2000 election. Kulish embedded with a Marine helicopter squadron for the invasion of Iraq. He left the Journal to take a Fulbright creative-writing grant in Berlin, where he wrote a novel set during the opening weeks of the Iraq war, called Last One In. He spent two years on The New York Times editorial board, before moving back to Berlin in August 2007 to become the paper’s Berlin bureau chief. Samir Said - Has been living and working as a freelance journalist in Germany for the last five years. Born in Egypt, he studied at Cairo’s Ain Shams University. In 2004 he and his family relocated to Germany, his wife’s home country. He works for Arabic and English medias. He is presently working as a consultant, assisting European media to gain a foothold in the Arab World.  

Ulrike Herrmann – started her career in banking before taking up journalism at the Henri Nannen School afterwards studying history and philosophy at Berlin’s Free University. She then worked as a research assistant at the Körber Foundation and was the press officer for Hamburg’s Equal Opportunities minister, Krista Sager. In 2000 she became a political correspondent and business editor at the Berlin daily "taz". These days she is the responsible editor for the opinion page of this newspaper.  

Nicholas Kulish was born in Washington in 1975 and raised in Arlington, Virginia. He graduated from Columbia College in New York with a bachelor’s of arts degree. He worked a series of odd writing and Internet jobs in Hong Kong and New York before landing as a news assistant at The Wall Street Journal. He worked his way up to staff reporter in the paper’s Washington bureau, covering everything from economics to the presidential recount in Florida following the 2000 election. Kulish embedded with a Marine helicopter squadron for the invasion of Iraq. He left the Journal to take a Fulbright creative-writing grant in Berlin, where he wrote a novel set during the opening weeks of the Iraq war, called Last One In. He spent two years on The New York Times editorial board, before moving back to Berlin in August 2007 to become the paper’s Berlin bureau chief. Ulrike Herrmann – started her career in banking before taking up journalism at the Henri Nannen School afterwards studying history and philosophy at Berlin’s Free University. She then worked as a research assistant at the Körber Foundation and was the press officer for Hamburg’s Equal Opportunities minister, Krista Sager. In 2000 she became a political correspondent and business editor at the Berlin daily "taz". These days she is the responsible editor for the opinion page of this newspaper.  

Nicholas Kulish was born in Washington in 1975 and raised in Arlington, Virginia. He graduated from Columbia College in New York with a bachelor’s of arts degree. He worked a series of odd writing and Internet jobs in Hong Kong and New York before landing as a news assistant at The Wall Street Journal. He worked his way up to staff reporter in the paper’s Washington bureau, covering everything from economics to the presidential recount in Florida following the 2000 election. Kulish embedded with a Marine helicopter squadron for the invasion of Iraq. He left the Journal to take a Fulbright creative-writing grant in Berlin, where he wrote a novel set during the opening weeks of the Iraq war, called Last One In. He spent two years on The New York Times editorial board, before moving back to Berlin in August 2007 to become the paper’s Berlin bureau chief. Ulrike Herrmann – started her career in banking before taking up journalism at the Henri Nannen School afterwards studying history and philosophy at Berlin’s Free University. She then worked as a research assistant at the Körber Foundation and was the press officer for Hamburg’s Equal Opportunities minister, Krista Sager. In 2000 she became a political correspondent and business editor at the Berlin daily "taz". These days she is the responsible editor for the opinion page of this newspaper.  

Nicholas Kulish was born in Washington in 1975 and raised in Arlington, Virginia. He graduated from Columbia College in New York with a bachelor’s of arts degree. He worked a series of odd writing and Internet jobs in Hong Kong and New York before landing as a news assistant at The Wall Street Journal. He worked his way up to staff reporter in the paper’s Washington bureau, covering everything from economics to the presidential recount in Florida following the 2000 election. Kulish embedded with a Marine helicopter squadron for the invasion of Iraq. He left the Journal to take a Fulbright creative-writing grant in Berlin, where he wrote a novel set during the opening weeks of the Iraq war, called Last One In. He spent two years on The New York Times editorial board, before moving back to Berlin in August 2007 to become the paper’s Berlin bureau chief. Nicholas Kulish was born in Washington in 1975 and raised in Arlington, Virginia. He graduated from Columbia College in New York with a bachelor’s of arts degree. He worked a series of odd writing and Internet jobs in Hong Kong and New York before landing as a news assistant at The Wall Street Journal. He worked his way up to staff reporter in the paper’s Washington bureau, covering everything from economics to the presidential recount in Florida following the 2000 election. Kulish embedded with a Marine helicopter squadron for the invasion of Iraq. He left the Journal to take a Fulbright creative-writing grant in Berlin, where he wrote a novel set during the opening weeks of the Iraq war, called Last One In. He spent two years on The New York Times editorial board, before moving back to Berlin in August 2007 to become the paper’s Berlin bureau chief. Nicholas Kulish was born in Washington in 1975 and raised in Arlington, Virginia. He graduated from Columbia College in New York with a bachelor’s of arts degree. He worked a series of odd writing and Internet jobs in Hong Kong and New York before landing as a news assistant at The Wall Street Journal. He worked his way up to staff reporter in the paper’s Washington bureau, covering everything from economics to the presidential recount in Florida following the 2000 election. Kulish embedded with a Marine helicopter squadron for the invasion of Iraq. He left the Journal to take a Fulbright creative-writing grant in Berlin, where he wrote a novel set during the opening weeks of the Iraq war, called Last One In. He spent two years on The New York Times editorial board, before moving back to Berlin in August 2007 to become the paper’s Berlin bureau chief.


Muslim outrage 'fueled by more than religion' In many Muslim countries people continue to demonstrate against the film "Innocence of Muslims." But is religion really the main issue? Arab intellectuals have a different view. A howl of outrage is being heard across the Arab world. Many Muslims are convinced that their Prophet has been insulted, and they cannot and will not accept it. But is religion really the issue here - or, more precisely, is religion the only issue? The Arab newspaper Al Hayat is skeptical. In a recent editorial it interpreted the protests as a belated consequence of decades of dictatorial rule. Citizens of many Arab countries have suffered under years of oppression, isolation and a lack of prospects, it writes. The paper believes that the protests are a discharge of pent-up resentments now a collective pretext has been found for their release. "What is happening right now," writes Al Hayat, "is far from having religious significance. Of course the case that triggered the protests had to do with religion. But the reaction to it was not an expression of religious faith, but of a complex historical, political and societal conflict situation." The demonstrators' anger may in fact be aimed at the government So are decades of accumulated resentment now simply seeking an outlet? This interpretation would imply that the demonstrations and the accompanying violence are simply a twisted expression of pent-up suffering caused by political and societal injustice. Speaking to Deutsche Welle, the Syrian philosopher Sadiq Al-Azm commented that at the present time societies in the Arab and Muslim world are very volatile and easily excited. "In such a situation, it provokes a violent reaction, even an explosion, if important symbols are attacked. But these actions are not planned. They're instigated by ordinary people." Above all, he explains, these demonstrations are not really aimed at Western states, but secretly have a quite different target: "Ultimately, the demonstrators are turning on their own governments." The anger is diffuse: it isn't expressed in political language, and doesn't call for dialogue either. Gamal Soltan, political scientist at the American University of Cairo, explains that this is part of its nature. The protesters are mostly from a particular societal group: "They're primarily people from the underclass. But it must be said that, quantitatively speaking, attempts to incite these people have not been especially successful. In Cairo and other cities there were really very few people out on the street. But of course it is a very sensitive moral issue, and this is something people will take to the streets about." Channeled protests Some say the protests are being exploited by radical Islamists Yet the protest is not altogether clear in its intentions. Different groups are well aware of how useful it can be in furthering their interests. In Egypt, for example, the Salafists feel sidelined, despite their success in the parliamentary elections. They do not have a big role in the political decision-making process. Soltan explains that, for them, it is therefore all the more important to try and gain power over the people on the street and exert greater political influence that way. On the one hand, he says, the protests are spontaneous, but on the other, this spontaneity has been instrumentalized. "There are Salafist groupings that are making use of the new freedoms," he says. "Before, they were forced to lie low. Now they can openly oppose the Muslim Brotherhood, even the government." In Tunisia too spontaneous outrage may be being carefully channeled. Speaking to DW, the blogger Lina Ben Mhenni argues that the Nahda Party, which is represented in the governing coalition, is systematically trying to Islamicize the country. It wants to distract people from the fact that it is unable to get to grips with Tunisia's economic and social problems, she says. Ben Mhenni says she has observed that the Nahda Party maintains links with Salafists. "When the Nahda Party has a problem or can't manage to convince the population, it makes use of the Salafists to divert attention from the real problems," she says. "Then the Salafists appear and get violent, to cover up the actual problems." Lax embassy security Is one of Tunisia's governing parties provoking the unrest? Tunisian lawyer Raja Sakrani, currently working at Bonn University's Center for Global Cooperation Research, takes a similar view. Sakrani told DW she couldn't say to what extent there was contact between the Nahda Party and violent Salafist groups, but that during the recent protests against the Muhammad film one thing struck her about the storming of the US embassy in Tunis. "The embassy is normally well protected," she said. "It's not that easy to get into the grounds. So the fact that it was so easy for the attackers to get into the compound does at least raise questions about the security arrangements by the Interior Ministry." Political observers generally agree that the anger on the street is in part spontaneous, but is also partly being channeled. Above all, they see it as an indication that, even after the recent revolutions, political and social problems in many Arab countries are still not being adequately addressed.


No "Angolan Spring" before the elections. National elections will be held in Angola at the end of the month. The polls are expected to end in victory for the ruling MPLA party, though they are tentative signs of a "Angolan Spring." Inspired by the Arab Spring that swept through the Middle East and North Africa, more and more young Angolans are calling for the ousting of President Eduardo dos Santos. His MPLA party has ruled the country since it gained independence from Portugal more than 30 years ago. The only authoritarian leader who has been in power longer than dos Santos is Equatorial Guinea's Teodoro Obiang Nguema. The MPLA dominates politics and the media. Increasingly, though, young people in Angola are coming to believe they have had enough of their dictator. Students, artists and citizens' rights activists, have been  openly calling for demonstrations to overthrow dos Santos since last year 30-year-old rapper Carbono Casimiro's lyrics tell of the desperation felt by young people. His country, Angola, is one of the most resource-rich countries in the world, yet it offers no prospects for its youth. Instead, they are ground down by unemployment, poverty and corruption. “We are all victims of catastrophic governance, that's why i don't just do music, but I hit the streets with other young people and demonstrate against the government”, says Casimoro. “But the government suppresses our freedoms, and we are afraid something could happen to us. We are peaceful and we're not looking for confrontation with the government. We want justice.." Hope for an "Angolan Spring" President Eduardo dos Santos' ruling party the MPLA has been in power since independence Although the protest movement believes the majority of the population is on their side, especially in the slums of the capital, Luanda, only a few hundred protestors have the courage to take to the streets. Others are worried by reprisals from the state security apparatus. "Zedu", as the  Angolan President dos Santos is called by the population, is a feared man. Yet some young Angolans are wondering that if the former Tunisian leader Ben Ali, Egypt's Hosni Mubarak,  or Libya's Muammar Gaddafi can be ousted from power, then why couldn't the same happen to dos Santos..  The young protestors appear to be well-organized and perhaps  aware of the dangers they face if caught by security agents. They communicate via mobile phone and the Internet. On social media the young protestors call for a revolution of the Angolan people against 32 years of tyranny and bad governance. Some of their slogans read "Angola's Youth against Corruption" or "President zedu out - Down with dictatorship". Repression and regime propaganda Youth demonstrations hope to bring about change in Angola Angolan police, military and intelligence agencies are nervous. Attempts to bribe the leaders of the protesters with cash or cars, alternate with threats, violence and attacks against members of the protest movement who are known to them. Despite this intimidation, Libertador, the pseudonym of one of the protest movement leaders, is determined not to give in. ”For almost 33 years we have had a tyrant in power, we will never stop fighting for democracy in our country," he says.  Hungry for change Rapper Luaty Beirão hopes his music will help bring about a more democratic Angola Angola is still a long way from being a democracy, because the opposition parties are not given a fair chance to compete with the party in power. Rapper Luaty Beirão, known as "Ikonoklasta" or "Brigadeiro Matafrakus" in hip-hop circles, wishes that the MPLA were swept from office. "People of my age have never known a time when there was another party in power," he says.  Luaty Beirão comes from a family loyal to regime. His father, João Beirão, was, for many years the head of the state-owned dos Santos Foundation. The son, though, regards the Angolan political elite with contempt.. "We are fed up with the MPLA and are hungry  for change. The MPLA have installed a dirty, corrupt system in our country ," he says. He will be voting against the MPLA in the elections on 31 August  Resilience through music In previous elections the MPLA has secured more than 80 percent of the vote Rapper Carbono Casimiro has recently released a new song on the Internet. It tells of the brutality the regime uses to repress dissent . "They beat us up and arrest us just because we demand  bread, medical care and education," the lyrics say That track is ironically called "Bom Cidadão," meaning "good citizen". Carbono himself has experienced such brutality first hand. He was jailed for several weeks because he joined a demonstration against President Eduardo dos Santos. Optimistic observers believe that an Angolan Spring will eventually erode away the power of the MPLA and its leaders, even if they do win the elections on August 31.


Is Syria the next Libya? Syrian security forces appear to be showing no let-up in their violent crackdown on anti-government protesters. Prominent Syrian human rights activist Radwan Ziadeh has drawn up three possible conflict scenarios. Radwan Ziadeh is the founder and director of the "Damascus Center for Human Rights Studies." He was a leading activist of the 2001 Damascus Spring movement that demanded more political freedom and an end to one-party rule. In 2008 Syrian authorities issued an arrest warrant against Ziadeh, who has been living and teaching in Washington D.C. since 2007. Tunisia's President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali was toppled after 32 days, his Egyptian counterpart Hosni Mubarak after 18. The revolutions there ended decades of autocratic rule and then rumbled on across the Arab world. Libya was next where the uprisings were met with brute force. So far 10,000 people have been killed. In Yemen, too, the revolt has spread to nearly all of the country's provinces and President Ali Abdullah Saleh appears to be standing on the edge of an abyss. A closer examination of these revolutions reveals two so-called models of liberation: 1. The Tunisian, Egyptian and Yemeni model Events in Egypt paved the way for this model where thousands upon thousands of demonstrators gathered in Cairo's central square day after day, thus piling up the pressure on Mubarak to go. The army played a pivotal role simply by refusing to open fire on the demonstrators, essentially rendering Mubarak's power obsolete. An ideal model then, in as much as fatalities were kept to a minimum because the revolutions retained their peaceful character. The demonstrators showed the discipline needed to stick to non-violent action. That led to a huge outpouring of sympathy and support not just from their fellow Egyptians but also from the international community, thereby increasing the pressure on the president to step down. 2. The Libyan model Here, armed opposition is being used as the last resort against the Gadhafi regime. Rebels captured the Western town of Misrata, liberated other parts of the country and advanced as far as possible. Libyan lawyers and judges kicked off the protests with their Egypt-style rallies outside the courthouse in Benghazi. Libyan security forces, however showed little of the restraint exercised by their Egyptian counterparts, and almost immediately resorted to violence to disperse the protesters. The ensuing casualties meant that the Libyan revolution almost immediately went from being peaceful to an armed revolt. The uprising was fuelled further by Gadhafi's scorched earth policy, using heavy weapons and fighter planes against his own people. As a result, the Libyan people only had one option left which was to appeal to the international community to stop Gadhafi's killing machine. It remains to be seen how long the Gadhafi regime can cling to power. The question is to what extent these models can be applied to events in Syria. At first glance, the demonstations in Syria have remained peaceful, despite the violent crackdown and killings by the security forces. Dozens of protesters have been killed by snipers whenever they tried to gather at the central squares of towns like Daraa, Lattakia, Duma and Homs. Each and every time they were dispersed by Syrian security forces, not with teargas or batons, but with targeted shots to the head and upper body. As to whether the events will take on the dimension of what is happening in Libya, there are three possible scenarios at play: 1. The Syrian regime weathers the storm The demonstrations and protests are put down violently and decisively within a timespan of a year or sooner, similar to Iran's "Green Revolution" in 2009 or Burma's "Saffron Revolution" in 2007. The Syrian regime is counting on achieving the same effect with its random use of force and live ammunition, while the use of snipers is increasingly creating panic among protesters and leading to dwindling numbers. Military checkpoints have been set up at all the important access roads and town districts have been isolated from each other to prevent protests from spilling over. Those who violate the curfew are shot dead, as has happened in Duma, Muadhamiya, Daria and other suburbs of Damascus. Those actions have curtailed the protest movements even though the Syrian regime has far fewer supporters than Iran's. That was highlighted by the fact that the protests began in a governorate traditionally loyal to the Assad regime and not in the Kurdish regions that have a long history of staging anti-regime protests. So far the Sunni secular population in places like Aleppo has stayed on the sidelines, however if the protests spread to these areas and people there take to the streets, Assad's regime would be in great danger and not even a large-scale violent crackdown would save it. There are first signs of dissent within Syrian army ranks  2. A split within Syria's army A second scenario would see the protests continue, albeit at a lower intensity, and the army would continue its violent crackdown. However if Syrian troops were forced to fight on several fronts at the same time, this could create more divisions and lead to soldiers breaking ranks as has happened in Daraa, Rastan Homs and Dania. There have been widespread reports that those deserters were shot by security forces. Eyewitnesses and soldiers report of a mutiny within the Syrian army and those reports have also been backed up by videos on the Internet. If the army were to become bogged down in protracted battles with protesters, it would only be a matter of time before high-ranking officers changed sides. Those officers breaking ranks to protect civilians would likely have to do battle with the elite "Fourth Division", however they would first need to secure the backing of the lower-ranked soldiers and it would require that the demonstrations spread across the whole country and remain peaceful. 3. Foreign intervention The third possible option would see the protests and the army crackdown continue relentlessly. Should the civilian death toll continue to rise it could pave the way for international involvement to protect the protesters. Of the three options, this is the least desirable as it would mean that Syria follows in Libya's footsteps. Given the increasingly violent crackdown and the regime's apparent indifference in the face of international condemnation and sanctions, foreign intervention is a distinct possibility. At the end of the day, all three scenarios are realistic. Much depends now on what happens on the ground in Syria. Once that becomes clearer, all eyes will turn to gauge the reaction of the neighboring countries and of the international community. Author: Radwan Ziadeh (rm) Editor: Michael Knigge


Relentless fighting continues in Syria While the Arab League is mulling over options to help Syria, fighting between the regime and the opposition continues unabated. Syrian government troops continued their attacks on opposition strongholds over the weekend killing more than 60 people, according to activists. The majority of casualties were registered in the city of Homs, but attacks were also reported in the provinces Daraa and Hama. The recent killing of a senior Syrian army officer by opposition forces as well as two bomb attacks in Aleppo, allegedly masterminded by the terrorist network al Qaeda, suggest the civil war in Syria is gaining momentum.  Medical and food supplies needed "It's almost impossible to imagine the situation here," says Mohammed (name changed by DW), an opposition supporter from Damascus. The 35-year-old was arrested and tortured following a demonstration in the capital two weeks ago and has since been released. "The besieged towns desperately need medical and food supplies. It's crucial the Red Cross is granted access to these areas as soon as possible," he pleaded. Syria is increasingly isolated from its Arab neighbors So far more than 5,000 people have been killed during the uprising against Assad's regime, according to the United Nations. Exact figures are not available because the Syrian government is not providing any reliable information and clamping down on journalists. Moreover, the Arab League's team of observers has suspended its operations due to the ongoing fighting.  Arab League appoints special envoy The head of the Arab League's Syria mission, the Sudanese General Mohammed al-Dabi, resigned shortly ahead of a League meeting in Cairo on Sunday. The Syrian opposition has long been critical of the general because he is considered a close ally of Sudanese President Omar al-Bashir, who is wanted by the Hague-based International Criminal Court for war crimes in Darfur. Former Jordanian Foreign Minister Abdul-Illah al-Khatib has been nominated as the League's new envoy to Syria. The Arab League is also planning a joint Syria mission with the United Nations. Diplomatic ties with Assad's government are to be severed and the existing sanctions – including travel bans and the freezing of bank accounts – are to be enforced rigidly. Recognizing the Syrian National Council? The Arab States appear to be considering the full recognition of the opposition Syrian National Council as the country's only legitimate representative body. The Council is an opposition alliance, formed during the 2011 protests against the Assad government, and based in Istanbul, Turkey. However, it is unclear to what extent this fledgling alliance represents the Syrian people. It has so far only been officially recognized by Libya's transitional government. Iran is one of Assad's few allies The Cairo conference also discussed a document which Saudi Arabia wants to present at the UN General Assembly. According to US broadcaster CNN, this three-page paper strongly condemns the violation of human rights by the Syrian regime. The General Assembly may issue an official condemnation but this counts little on the ground. Besides, only last week China and Russia vetoed an already watered down Syria resolution in the UN Security Council.  Al Qaeda calls for rebellion While the Arab states are trying to ramp up the pressure on the Syrian government, the terror network al Qaeda has released a new video message, calling on Muslims around the globe to support the Syrian rebels. The group's leader Ayman al-Zawahiri urged the opposition to continue fighting and establish an Islamic state in Syria. He also warned Syrians not to rely on the Arab League, Turkey or the West. In contrast, Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, a key ally of Assad, on Saturday warned Arab states to refrain from financially aiding the Syrian opposition. Speaking at a rally to mark the anniversary of Iran's Islamic revolution, he said countries in the region, which have never had any fair elections, were with the help of the US trying to force "their own version of freedom and elections" on others. According to a report in Israeli daily Haaretz from Sunday, Iran props up the Syrian regime financially. Secret documents show that Tehran is willing to help Syria with trade deals worth more than a billion dollars. 'Fall of regime predictable' Arab ministers say that Tunisia is planning an international conference on February 24, in an effort to counteract Iran's influence in Syria. At the meeting, which has been dubbed 'Friends of Syria,' leaders will discuss ways to end the violence.  According to Tunisian Foreign Minister Rafik Ben Adessalam Arab as well as other states will attend the meeting. Damascus has already cut diplomatic ties with Tunisia and Libya and expelled their ambassadors from Syria, as both countries openly voiced support for the opposition. "It's about making it clear to the regime that the end of the road is nigh, that there is no going back to the normality before the beginning and subsequent quashing of the uprising," Volker Perthens, director at the German Insitute for International and Security Affairs, said. He believes supporting the opposition is important for the future of Syria. "The sanctions help, as does the diplomatic isolation, but also the concrete help for the opposition to prepare for the time after the inevitable downfall of the regime." Author: Anne Allmeling / nk, ng Editor: Richard Connor


Opinion: Egypt, Tunisia offer Arab world a window to freedom After popular uprisings toppled governments in both Cairo and Tunis, pessimists fear for the stability of the region. DW's Ibrahim Mohamad is more positive, claiming the fall of the Berlin Wall sets a useful precedent. "We are the people" was call of the people of East Germany more than 20 years ago at their Monday demonstrations. I was able to witness the fall of the Berlin Wall first hand, and today I am compelled to think about it again and again. The pictures from Cairo, and before that from Tunis, resemble those historic scenes from Leipzig and Berlin. The leadership has been toppled and the people are united. The people have triumphed. Millions of Arab citizens from Mauritania to Bahrain are fascinated and enthused by the window to freedom that these events have opened. They all suffer, to a greater or lesser extent, from tyranny, from an absence of freedom. They, too, are "the people." Tunisian President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali was toppled on January 14, 2011, while the Egyptian "pharaoh" Hosni Mubarak fell from power on February 11. I am full of hope and confidence that these two dates will have a similar place in world history as November 9, 1989, the day of the fall of the Berlin wall and the day that marked a milestone as communist regimes fell across Eastern Europe. "The Egyptians have inspired us," said US President Barack Obama. "They changed their country and in doing so changed the world." It is true that, for other reasons, the US president is not as popular as he once was in the Arab world. These words, though, touched my heart. Remarkable courage First Tunisia, then Egypt. And tomorrow? Algeria has already seen angry protests, as have Yemen, Jordan and even Sudan. Other countries could soon follow. The spark is there, multiplied a million times by modern forms of communication; through the Internet and major satellite channels.  DW's Ibrahim Mohamad thinks the prospects are not as bad as some people fear The successful popular uprisings in Tunisia and, most significantly, in Egypt have unleashed a long undreamt of desire for freedom. There is much evidence now of a chain reaction, a "domino effect" as anger and rage mix with feelings of a new political dawn and remarkable courage. "If the people want to live, fate must surely answer their call," was the motto of Tunisia's Jasmine Revolution. Violence, repression, censorship: nothing can stop the people now. What has happened can happen anywhere and nobody should be afraid. Naturally, there are risks. The lapse of appropriate controls during the transition may result in new waves of refugees as we have seen on the Italian island of Lampedusa. Only economic growth can help, with the strongest possible support from Europe. In the long term, several questions arise. What will happen to the architecture of stability and security in the region? What forces will eventually prevail? The concern is understandable but it would be counter productive and give the wrong signal to focus upon this. Firstly, stability and security have in the region always been extremely fragile - and the so-called "pro-Western" autocrats have played their part in that. Furthermore, people are arguing very transparently for pluralism, democracy and social justice. They have not allowed religious differences or other possible divisions among themselves to be a factor. For this, they deserve admiration and respect. Even Islamic and other ideologies have fortunately, until now, played only a minor role. Europe as a role model History does not repeat itself as such, but it can set precedents. In spite of the differences between Europe and the Arab world, I hope that the fall of the Berlin Wall and the break-up of the Eastern Bloc can prove to be a model. Indeed, I dream of a new Arab world with multi-party systems, democratically elected governments, independent judiciaries, freedom of expression and a strong and vibrant civil society. I know that very many people dream of this. Across the Arab world, people yearn for freedom and justice. They do not want direct interference from outside. What they do want is assistance and encouragement. Author: Ibrahim Mohamad / rc Editor: Chuck Penfold


'We have been conducting a very nasty policy of double standards' After almost a year of the so-called Arab Spring, some countries have fared better than others, says the German Green party spokeswoman for foreign affairs, Kerstin Müller, in this Deutsche Welle interview. Kerstin Müller is a member of the German parliament and the foreign policy spokeswoman of the Green party. This interview was conducted by Ute Schaeffer, editor-in-chief of Deutsche Welle. 

Deutsche Welle: The revolutions across the Arab World began nearly a year ago. When you look back at the events in the region - particularly in Tunisia and Egypt - how democratic are these countries now, one year on? 

Kerstin Müller: I think Tunisia, really, has every chance of achieving the transformation to democracy. They have, above all, made a very clean break from the old regime. The old guard is not allowed to run for office; trials are in progress for former members of the regime; corruption is being rooted out; and a very transparent, open process has been established: elections are being prepared; and constitutional assemblies are being organized to draw up a new constitution, which will be the basis for electing a parliament. In other words, society is being given an entirely new foundation. 
In Egypt, however, I see things differently. There is a very nontransparent process of elections and changes, all of it channeled by the Supreme Military Council. There have been rudimentary changes to the constitution, but nothing fundamental - at least not yet. And the big question is, whether, and when, the transition to democracy will happen. 
I think at the moment we are witnessing a really rough-and-tumble fight between the old guard and the military on the one side and the forces of modernization on the other - and it is not at all clear, who is going to win this struggle. The military has a firm grip on the reins of power and has re-installed all the instruments of the old regime. 

In Egypt's case, do you think there is a danger of a sort of hybrid system with no real democracy? 
I highly doubt whether the military council is prepared to organize a transition. That would mean giving up its political and economic power. I think the military council will give up only so much power, or organize so much democracy, as not to undermine its own power. 
This is evident in the transition process, which was supposed to last six months, but now will continue until the end of 2013. Whether or not it will really be over by then is anybody's guess. 
When elections really take place is open and the military council is holding on to the constitutional assembly to name 80 of the 100 members itself. If there is no constitution in six months, then it wants to take over the entire process. 
In my view, there is a rough-and-tumble fight going on, and it is the task of the European Union, the Europeans, the West, to clearly say and demand that the military council step down and hand over the economic and political powers to a legitimate, political government. 

Looking at our tasks and foreign policy in the EU and Germany, are you satisfied with the way we have supported Egypt and Tunisia in building a civil society, democratic institutions and political parties? 
What the European Union has done well, certainly, is to set up programs focusing on civil society and supporting the processes in Tunisia and Egypt, although one has to say that the Egyptians have not really taken advantage of this, while the Tunisians have welcomed it with open arms. 
What hasn't been done so far is undertaking a critical review, a fundamental, critical review of existing European policy. We have been conducting a very nasty policy of double standards. We pampered the Mubaraks and Ben Alis, collaborated with them on issues, like refugee controls and anti-terrorism efforts, but we've essentially closed our eyes to issues, like human rights and democracy. 
We have a credibility deficit. We need to win back our credibility, and we can only do that by actually supporting the democracy movement and not by banking on questionable stability from a military council. We need to open our markets to give their economies a chance, and we need to end our refugee control policies and switch to a more sensible migration policy with these countries. 

...and we can only be credible, if we are heard. But that can only happen, if we make a concerted effort to speak with one voice. Do you have the impression that we have finally let go of national politics in favor of common political goals which we jointly act on as Europeans? 
No. There are still the national policies, and especially, there is a race between the French, the Germans, the British and the Americans to be the first with a foot in the door. There is little common policy here and more national interest. 
I think we will not reach our goals when as many small national programs as possible are set up alongside European Union ones. Instead, I think it would be better, for coherency's sake, to do everything possible so that Europe can speak with one voice. 
This is what has been decided at the EU level: Programs, for example, to promote civil society and women's rights based on our principles of our values. This is where the EU should be supported, instead of having every country stewing in its own juices. 
Interview: Ute Schaeffer / gb
Editor: Rob Mudge Deutsche Welle: The revolutions across the Arab World began nearly a year ago. When you look back at the events in the region - particularly in Tunisia and Egypt - how democratic are these countries now, one year on? 

Kerstin Müller: I think Tunisia, really, has every chance of achieving the transformation to democracy. They have, above all, made a very clean break from the old regime. The old guard is not allowed to run for office; trials are in progress for former members of the regime; corruption is being rooted out; and a very transparent, open process has been established: elections are being prepared; and constitutional assemblies are being organized to draw up a new constitution, which will be the basis for electing a parliament. In other words, society is being given an entirely new foundation. 
In Egypt, however, I see things differently. There is a very nontransparent process of elections and changes, all of it channeled by the Supreme Military Council. There have been rudimentary changes to the constitution, but nothing fundamental - at least not yet. And the big question is, whether, and when, the transition to democracy will happen. 
I think at the moment we are witnessing a really rough-and-tumble fight between the old guard and the military on the one side and the forces of modernization on the other - and it is not at all clear, who is going to win this struggle. The military has a firm grip on the reins of power and has re-installed all the instruments of the old regime. 

In Egypt's case, do you think there is a danger of a sort of hybrid system with no real democracy? 
I highly doubt whether the military council is prepared to organize a transition. That would mean giving up its political and economic power. I think the military council will give up only so much power, or organize so much democracy, as not to undermine its own power. 
This is evident in the transition process, which was supposed to last six months, but now will continue until the end of 2013. Whether or not it will really be over by then is anybody's guess. 
When elections really take place is open and the military council is holding on to the constitutional assembly to name 80 of the 100 members itself. If there is no constitution in six months, then it wants to take over the entire process. 
In my view, there is a rough-and-tumble fight going on, and it is the task of the European Union, the Europeans, the West, to clearly say and demand that the military council step down and hand over the economic and political powers to a legitimate, political government. 

Looking at our tasks and foreign policy in the EU and Germany, are you satisfied with the way we have supported Egypt and Tunisia in building a civil society, democratic institutions and political parties? 
What the European Union has done well, certainly, is to set up programs focusing on civil society and supporting the processes in Tunisia and Egypt, although one has to say that the Egyptians have not really taken advantage of this, while the Tunisians have welcomed it with open arms. 
What hasn't been done so far is undertaking a critical review, a fundamental, critical review of existing European policy. We have been conducting a very nasty policy of double standards. We pampered the Mubaraks and Ben Alis, collaborated with them on issues, like refugee controls and anti-terrorism efforts, but we've essentially closed our eyes to issues, like human rights and democracy. 
We have a credibility deficit. We need to win back our credibility, and we can only do that by actually supporting the democracy movement and not by banking on questionable stability from a military council. We need to open our markets to give their economies a chance, and we need to end our refugee control policies and switch to a more sensible migration policy with these countries. 

...and we can only be credible, if we are heard. But that can only happen, if we make a concerted effort to speak with one voice. Do you have the impression that we have finally let go of national politics in favor of common political goals which we jointly act on as Europeans? 
No. There are still the national policies, and especially, there is a race between the French, the Germans, the British and the Americans to be the first with a foot in the door. There is little common policy here and more national interest. 
I think we will not reach our goals when as many small national programs as possible are set up alongside European Union ones. Instead, I think it would be better, for coherency's sake, to do everything possible so that Europe can speak with one voice. 
This is what has been decided at the EU level: Programs, for example, to promote civil society and women's rights based on our principles of our values. This is where the EU should be supported, instead of having every country stewing in its own juices. 
Interview: Ute Schaeffer / gb
Editor: Rob Mudge Kerstin Müller: I think Tunisia, really, has every chance of achieving the transformation to democracy. They have, above all, made a very clean break from the old regime. The old guard is not allowed to run for office; trials are in progress for former members of the regime; corruption is being rooted out; and a very transparent, open process has been established: elections are being prepared; and constitutional assemblies are being organized to draw up a new constitution, which will be the basis for electing a parliament. In other words, society is being given an entirely new foundation. 
In Egypt, however, I see things differently. There is a very nontransparent process of elections and changes, all of it channeled by the Supreme Military Council. There have been rudimentary changes to the constitution, but nothing fundamental - at least not yet. And the big question is, whether, and when, the transition to democracy will happen. 
I think at the moment we are witnessing a really rough-and-tumble fight between the old guard and the military on the one side and the forces of modernization on the other - and it is not at all clear, who is going to win this struggle. The military has a firm grip on the reins of power and has re-installed all the instruments of the old regime. 

In Egypt's case, do you think there is a danger of a sort of hybrid system with no real democracy? 
I highly doubt whether the military council is prepared to organize a transition. That would mean giving up its political and economic power. I think the military council will give up only so much power, or organize so much democracy, as not to undermine its own power. 
This is evident in the transition process, which was supposed to last six months, but now will continue until the end of 2013. Whether or not it will really be over by then is anybody's guess. 
When elections really take place is open and the military council is holding on to the constitutional assembly to name 80 of the 100 members itself. If there is no constitution in six months, then it wants to take over the entire process. 
In my view, there is a rough-and-tumble fight going on, and it is the task of the European Union, the Europeans, the West, to clearly say and demand that the military council step down and hand over the economic and political powers to a legitimate, political government. 

Looking at our tasks and foreign policy in the EU and Germany, are you satisfied with the way we have supported Egypt and Tunisia in building a civil society, democratic institutions and political parties? 
What the European Union has done well, certainly, is to set up programs focusing on civil society and supporting the processes in Tunisia and Egypt, although one has to say that the Egyptians have not really taken advantage of this, while the Tunisians have welcomed it with open arms. 
What hasn't been done so far is undertaking a critical review, a fundamental, critical review of existing European policy. We have been conducting a very nasty policy of double standards. We pampered the Mubaraks and Ben Alis, collaborated with them on issues, like refugee controls and anti-terrorism efforts, but we've essentially closed our eyes to issues, like human rights and democracy. 
We have a credibility deficit. We need to win back our credibility, and we can only do that by actually supporting the democracy movement and not by banking on questionable stability from a military council. We need to open our markets to give their economies a chance, and we need to end our refugee control policies and switch to a more sensible migration policy with these countries. 

...and we can only be credible, if we are heard. But that can only happen, if we make a concerted effort to speak with one voice. Do you have the impression that we have finally let go of national politics in favor of common political goals which we jointly act on as Europeans? 
No. There are still the national policies, and especially, there is a race between the French, the Germans, the British and the Americans to be the first with a foot in the door. There is little common policy here and more national interest. 
I think we will not reach our goals when as many small national programs as possible are set up alongside European Union ones. Instead, I think it would be better, for coherency's sake, to do everything possible so that Europe can speak with one voice. 
This is what has been decided at the EU level: Programs, for example, to promote civil society and women's rights based on our principles of our values. This is where the EU should be supported, instead of having every country stewing in its own juices. 
Interview: Ute Schaeffer / gb
Editor: Rob Mudge In Egypt, however, I see things differently. There is a very nontransparent process of elections and changes, all of it channeled by the Supreme Military Council. There have been rudimentary changes to the constitution, but nothing fundamental - at least not yet. And the big question is, whether, and when, the transition to democracy will happen. 
I think at the moment we are witnessing a really rough-and-tumble fight between the old guard and the military on the one side and the forces of modernization on the other - and it is not at all clear, who is going to win this struggle. The military has a firm grip on the reins of power and has re-installed all the instruments of the old regime. 

In Egypt's case, do you think there is a danger of a sort of hybrid system with no real democracy? 
I highly doubt whether the military council is prepared to organize a transition. That would mean giving up its political and economic power. I think the military council will give up only so much power, or organize so much democracy, as not to undermine its own power. 
This is evident in the transition process, which was supposed to last six months, but now will continue until the end of 2013. Whether or not it will really be over by then is anybody's guess. 
When elections really take place is open and the military council is holding on to the constitutional assembly to name 80 of the 100 members itself. If there is no constitution in six months, then it wants to take over the entire process. 
In my view, there is a rough-and-tumble fight going on, and it is the task of the European Union, the Europeans, the West, to clearly say and demand that the military council step down and hand over the economic and political powers to a legitimate, political government. 

Looking at our tasks and foreign policy in the EU and Germany, are you satisfied with the way we have supported Egypt and Tunisia in building a civil society, democratic institutions and political parties? 
What the European Union has done well, certainly, is to set up programs focusing on civil society and supporting the processes in Tunisia and Egypt, although one has to say that the Egyptians have not really taken advantage of this, while the Tunisians have welcomed it with open arms. 
What hasn't been done so far is undertaking a critical review, a fundamental, critical review of existing European policy. We have been conducting a very nasty policy of double standards. We pampered the Mubaraks and Ben Alis, collaborated with them on issues, like refugee controls and anti-terrorism efforts, but we've essentially closed our eyes to issues, like human rights and democracy. 
We have a credibility deficit. We need to win back our credibility, and we can only do that by actually supporting the democracy movement and not by banking on questionable stability from a military council. We need to open our markets to give their economies a chance, and we need to end our refugee control policies and switch to a more sensible migration policy with these countries. 

...and we can only be credible, if we are heard. But that can only happen, if we make a concerted effort to speak with one voice. Do you have the impression that we have finally let go of national politics in favor of common political goals which we jointly act on as Europeans? 
No. There are still the national policies, and especially, there is a race between the French, the Germans, the British and the Americans to be the first with a foot in the door. There is little common policy here and more national interest. 
I think we will not reach our goals when as many small national programs as possible are set up alongside European Union ones. Instead, I think it would be better, for coherency's sake, to do everything possible so that Europe can speak with one voice. 
This is what has been decided at the EU level: Programs, for example, to promote civil society and women's rights based on our principles of our values. This is where the EU should be supported, instead of having every country stewing in its own juices. 
Interview: Ute Schaeffer / gb
Editor: Rob Mudge I think at the moment we are witnessing a really rough-and-tumble fight between the old guard and the military on the one side and the forces of modernization on the other - and it is not at all clear, who is going to win this struggle. The military has a firm grip on the reins of power and has re-installed all the instruments of the old regime. 

In Egypt's case, do you think there is a danger of a sort of hybrid system with no real democracy? 
I highly doubt whether the military council is prepared to organize a transition. That would mean giving up its political and economic power. I think the military council will give up only so much power, or organize so much democracy, as not to undermine its own power. 
This is evident in the transition process, which was supposed to last six months, but now will continue until the end of 2013. Whether or not it will really be over by then is anybody's guess. 
When elections really take place is open and the military council is holding on to the constitutional assembly to name 80 of the 100 members itself. If there is no constitution in six months, then it wants to take over the entire process. 
In my view, there is a rough-and-tumble fight going on, and it is the task of the European Union, the Europeans, the West, to clearly say and demand that the military council step down and hand over the economic and political powers to a legitimate, political government. 

Looking at our tasks and foreign policy in the EU and Germany, are you satisfied with the way we have supported Egypt and Tunisia in building a civil society, democratic institutions and political parties? 
What the European Union has done well, certainly, is to set up programs focusing on civil society and supporting the processes in Tunisia and Egypt, although one has to say that the Egyptians have not really taken advantage of this, while the Tunisians have welcomed it with open arms. 
What hasn't been done so far is undertaking a critical review, a fundamental, critical review of existing European policy. We have been conducting a very nasty policy of double standards. We pampered the Mubaraks and Ben Alis, collaborated with them on issues, like refugee controls and anti-terrorism efforts, but we've essentially closed our eyes to issues, like human rights and democracy. 
We have a credibility deficit. We need to win back our credibility, and we can only do that by actually supporting the democracy movement and not by banking on questionable stability from a military council. We need to open our markets to give their economies a chance, and we need to end our refugee control policies and switch to a more sensible migration policy with these countries. 

...and we can only be credible, if we are heard. But that can only happen, if we make a concerted effort to speak with one voice. Do you have the impression that we have finally let go of national politics in favor of common political goals which we jointly act on as Europeans? 
No. There are still the national policies, and especially, there is a race between the French, the Germans, the British and the Americans to be the first with a foot in the door. There is little common policy here and more national interest. 
I think we will not reach our goals when as many small national programs as possible are set up alongside European Union ones. Instead, I think it would be better, for coherency's sake, to do everything possible so that Europe can speak with one voice. 
This is what has been decided at the EU level: Programs, for example, to promote civil society and women's rights based on our principles of our values. This is where the EU should be supported, instead of having every country stewing in its own juices. 
Interview: Ute Schaeffer / gb
Editor: Rob Mudge In Egypt's case, do you think there is a danger of a sort of hybrid system with no real democracy? 
I highly doubt whether the military council is prepared to organize a transition. That would mean giving up its political and economic power. I think the military council will give up only so much power, or organize so much democracy, as not to undermine its own power. 
This is evident in the transition process, which was supposed to last six months, but now will continue until the end of 2013. Whether or not it will really be over by then is anybody's guess. 
When elections really take place is open and the military council is holding on to the constitutional assembly to name 80 of the 100 members itself. If there is no constitution in six months, then it wants to take over the entire process. 
In my view, there is a rough-and-tumble fight going on, and it is the task of the European Union, the Europeans, the West, to clearly say and demand that the military council step down and hand over the economic and political powers to a legitimate, political government. 

Looking at our tasks and foreign policy in the EU and Germany, are you satisfied with the way we have supported Egypt and Tunisia in building a civil society, democratic institutions and political parties? 
What the European Union has done well, certainly, is to set up programs focusing on civil society and supporting the processes in Tunisia and Egypt, although one has to say that the Egyptians have not really taken advantage of this, while the Tunisians have welcomed it with open arms. 
What hasn't been done so far is undertaking a critical review, a fundamental, critical review of existing European policy. We have been conducting a very nasty policy of double standards. We pampered the Mubaraks and Ben Alis, collaborated with them on issues, like refugee controls and anti-terrorism efforts, but we've essentially closed our eyes to issues, like human rights and democracy. 
We have a credibility deficit. We need to win back our credibility, and we can only do that by actually supporting the democracy movement and not by banking on questionable stability from a military council. We need to open our markets to give their economies a chance, and we need to end our refugee control policies and switch to a more sensible migration policy with these countries. 

...and we can only be credible, if we are heard. But that can only happen, if we make a concerted effort to speak with one voice. Do you have the impression that we have finally let go of national politics in favor of common political goals which we jointly act on as Europeans? 
No. There are still the national policies, and especially, there is a race between the French, the Germans, the British and the Americans to be the first with a foot in the door. There is little common policy here and more national interest. 
I think we will not reach our goals when as many small national programs as possible are set up alongside European Union ones. Instead, I think it would be better, for coherency's sake, to do everything possible so that Europe can speak with one voice. 
This is what has been decided at the EU level: Programs, for example, to promote civil society and women's rights based on our principles of our values. This is where the EU should be supported, instead of having every country stewing in its own juices. 
Interview: Ute Schaeffer / gb
Editor: Rob Mudge I highly doubt whether the military council is prepared to organize a transition. That would mean giving up its political and economic power. I think the military council will give up only so much power, or organize so much democracy, as not to undermine its own power. 
This is evident in the transition process, which was supposed to last six months, but now will continue until the end of 2013. Whether or not it will really be over by then is anybody's guess. 
When elections really take place is open and the military council is holding on to the constitutional assembly to name 80 of the 100 members itself. If there is no constitution in six months, then it wants to take over the entire process. 
In my view, there is a rough-and-tumble fight going on, and it is the task of the European Union, the Europeans, the West, to clearly say and demand that the military council step down and hand over the economic and political powers to a legitimate, political government. 

Looking at our tasks and foreign policy in the EU and Germany, are you satisfied with the way we have supported Egypt and Tunisia in building a civil society, democratic institutions and political parties? 
What the European Union has done well, certainly, is to set up programs focusing on civil society and supporting the processes in Tunisia and Egypt, although one has to say that the Egyptians have not really taken advantage of this, while the Tunisians have welcomed it with open arms. 
What hasn't been done so far is undertaking a critical review, a fundamental, critical review of existing European policy. We have been conducting a very nasty policy of double standards. We pampered the Mubaraks and Ben Alis, collaborated with them on issues, like refugee controls and anti-terrorism efforts, but we've essentially closed our eyes to issues, like human rights and democracy. 
We have a credibility deficit. We need to win back our credibility, and we can only do that by actually supporting the democracy movement and not by banking on questionable stability from a military council. We need to open our markets to give their economies a chance, and we need to end our refugee control policies and switch to a more sensible migration policy with these countries. 

...and we can only be credible, if we are heard. But that can only happen, if we make a concerted effort to speak with one voice. Do you have the impression that we have finally let go of national politics in favor of common political goals which we jointly act on as Europeans? 
No. There are still the national policies, and especially, there is a race between the French, the Germans, the British and the Americans to be the first with a foot in the door. There is little common policy here and more national interest. 
I think we will not reach our goals when as many small national programs as possible are set up alongside European Union ones. Instead, I think it would be better, for coherency's sake, to do everything possible so that Europe can speak with one voice. 
This is what has been decided at the EU level: Programs, for example, to promote civil society and women's rights based on our principles of our values. This is where the EU should be supported, instead of having every country stewing in its own juices. 
Interview: Ute Schaeffer / gb
Editor: Rob Mudge This is evident in the transition process, which was supposed to last six months, but now will continue until the end of 2013. Whether or not it will really be over by then is anybody's guess. 
When elections really take place is open and the military council is holding on to the constitutional assembly to name 80 of the 100 members itself. If there is no constitution in six months, then it wants to take over the entire process. 
In my view, there is a rough-and-tumble fight going on, and it is the task of the European Union, the Europeans, the West, to clearly say and demand that the military council step down and hand over the economic and political powers to a legitimate, political government. 

Looking at our tasks and foreign policy in the EU and Germany, are you satisfied with the way we have supported Egypt and Tunisia in building a civil society, democratic institutions and political parties? 
What the European Union has done well, certainly, is to set up programs focusing on civil society and supporting the processes in Tunisia and Egypt, although one has to say that the Egyptians have not really taken advantage of this, while the Tunisians have welcomed it with open arms. 
What hasn't been done so far is undertaking a critical review, a fundamental, critical review of existing European policy. We have been conducting a very nasty policy of double standards. We pampered the Mubaraks and Ben Alis, collaborated with them on issues, like refugee controls and anti-terrorism efforts, but we've essentially closed our eyes to issues, like human rights and democracy. 
We have a credibility deficit. We need to win back our credibility, and we can only do that by actually supporting the democracy movement and not by banking on questionable stability from a military council. We need to open our markets to give their economies a chance, and we need to end our refugee control policies and switch to a more sensible migration policy with these countries. 

...and we can only be credible, if we are heard. But that can only happen, if we make a concerted effort to speak with one voice. Do you have the impression that we have finally let go of national politics in favor of common political goals which we jointly act on as Europeans? 
No. There are still the national policies, and especially, there is a race between the French, the Germans, the British and the Americans to be the first with a foot in the door. There is little common policy here and more national interest. 
I think we will not reach our goals when as many small national programs as possible are set up alongside European Union ones. Instead, I think it would be better, for coherency's sake, to do everything possible so that Europe can speak with one voice. 
This is what has been decided at the EU level: Programs, for example, to promote civil society and women's rights based on our principles of our values. This is where the EU should be supported, instead of having every country stewing in its own juices. 
Interview: Ute Schaeffer / gb
Editor: Rob Mudge When elections really take place is open and the military council is holding on to the constitutional assembly to name 80 of the 100 members itself. If there is no constitution in six months, then it wants to take over the entire process. 
In my view, there is a rough-and-tumble fight going on, and it is the task of the European Union, the Europeans, the West, to clearly say and demand that the military council step down and hand over the economic and political powers to a legitimate, political government. 

Looking at our tasks and foreign policy in the EU and Germany, are you satisfied with the way we have supported Egypt and Tunisia in building a civil society, democratic institutions and political parties? 
What the European Union has done well, certainly, is to set up programs focusing on civil society and supporting the processes in Tunisia and Egypt, although one has to say that the Egyptians have not really taken advantage of this, while the Tunisians have welcomed it with open arms. 
What hasn't been done so far is undertaking a critical review, a fundamental, critical review of existing European policy. We have been conducting a very nasty policy of double standards. We pampered the Mubaraks and Ben Alis, collaborated with them on issues, like refugee controls and anti-terrorism efforts, but we've essentially closed our eyes to issues, like human rights and democracy. 
We have a credibility deficit. We need to win back our credibility, and we can only do that by actually supporting the democracy movement and not by banking on questionable stability from a military council. We need to open our markets to give their economies a chance, and we need to end our refugee control policies and switch to a more sensible migration policy with these countries. 

...and we can only be credible, if we are heard. But that can only happen, if we make a concerted effort to speak with one voice. Do you have the impression that we have finally let go of national politics in favor of common political goals which we jointly act on as Europeans? 
No. There are still the national policies, and especially, there is a race between the French, the Germans, the British and the Americans to be the first with a foot in the door. There is little common policy here and more national interest. 
I think we will not reach our goals when as many small national programs as possible are set up alongside European Union ones. Instead, I think it would be better, for coherency's sake, to do everything possible so that Europe can speak with one voice. 
This is what has been decided at the EU level: Programs, for example, to promote civil society and women's rights based on our principles of our values. This is where the EU should be supported, instead of having every country stewing in its own juices. 
Interview: Ute Schaeffer / gb
Editor: Rob Mudge In my view, there is a rough-and-tumble fight going on, and it is the task of the European Union, the Europeans, the West, to clearly say and demand that the military council step down and hand over the economic and political powers to a legitimate, political government. 

Looking at our tasks and foreign policy in the EU and Germany, are you satisfied with the way we have supported Egypt and Tunisia in building a civil society, democratic institutions and political parties? 
What the European Union has done well, certainly, is to set up programs focusing on civil society and supporting the processes in Tunisia and Egypt, although one has to say that the Egyptians have not really taken advantage of this, while the Tunisians have welcomed it with open arms. 
What hasn't been done so far is undertaking a critical review, a fundamental, critical review of existing European policy. We have been conducting a very nasty policy of double standards. We pampered the Mubaraks and Ben Alis, collaborated with them on issues, like refugee controls and anti-terrorism efforts, but we've essentially closed our eyes to issues, like human rights and democracy. 
We have a credibility deficit. We need to win back our credibility, and we can only do that by actually supporting the democracy movement and not by banking on questionable stability from a military council. We need to open our markets to give their economies a chance, and we need to end our refugee control policies and switch to a more sensible migration policy with these countries. 

...and we can only be credible, if we are heard. But that can only happen, if we make a concerted effort to speak with one voice. Do you have the impression that we have finally let go of national politics in favor of common political goals which we jointly act on as Europeans? 
No. There are still the national policies, and especially, there is a race between the French, the Germans, the British and the Americans to be the first with a foot in the door. There is little common policy here and more national interest. 
I think we will not reach our goals when as many small national programs as possible are set up alongside European Union ones. Instead, I think it would be better, for coherency's sake, to do everything possible so that Europe can speak with one voice. 
This is what has been decided at the EU level: Programs, for example, to promote civil society and women's rights based on our principles of our values. This is where the EU should be supported, instead of having every country stewing in its own juices. 
Interview: Ute Schaeffer / gb
Editor: Rob Mudge Looking at our tasks and foreign policy in the EU and Germany, are you satisfied with the way we have supported Egypt and Tunisia in building a civil society, democratic institutions and political parties? 
What the European Union has done well, certainly, is to set up programs focusing on civil society and supporting the processes in Tunisia and Egypt, although one has to say that the Egyptians have not really taken advantage of this, while the Tunisians have welcomed it with open arms. 
What hasn't been done so far is undertaking a critical review, a fundamental, critical review of existing European policy. We have been conducting a very nasty policy of double standards. We pampered the Mubaraks and Ben Alis, collaborated with them on issues, like refugee controls and anti-terrorism efforts, but we've essentially closed our eyes to issues, like human rights and democracy. 
We have a credibility deficit. We need to win back our credibility, and we can only do that by actually supporting the democracy movement and not by banking on questionable stability from a military council. We need to open our markets to give their economies a chance, and we need to end our refugee control policies and switch to a more sensible migration policy with these countries. 

...and we can only be credible, if we are heard. But that can only happen, if we make a concerted effort to speak with one voice. Do you have the impression that we have finally let go of national politics in favor of common political goals which we jointly act on as Europeans? 
No. There are still the national policies, and especially, there is a race between the French, the Germans, the British and the Americans to be the first with a foot in the door. There is little common policy here and more national interest. 
I think we will not reach our goals when as many small national programs as possible are set up alongside European Union ones. Instead, I think it would be better, for coherency's sake, to do everything possible so that Europe can speak with one voice. 
This is what has been decided at the EU level: Programs, for example, to promote civil society and women's rights based on our principles of our values. This is where the EU should be supported, instead of having every country stewing in its own juices. 
Interview: Ute Schaeffer / gb
Editor: Rob Mudge What the European Union has done well, certainly, is to set up programs focusing on civil society and supporting the processes in Tunisia and Egypt, although one has to say that the Egyptians have not really taken advantage of this, while the Tunisians have welcomed it with open arms. 
What hasn't been done so far is undertaking a critical review, a fundamental, critical review of existing European policy. We have been conducting a very nasty policy of double standards. We pampered the Mubaraks and Ben Alis, collaborated with them on issues, like refugee controls and anti-terrorism efforts, but we've essentially closed our eyes to issues, like human rights and democracy. 
We have a credibility deficit. We need to win back our credibility, and we can only do that by actually supporting the democracy movement and not by banking on questionable stability from a military council. We need to open our markets to give their economies a chance, and we need to end our refugee control policies and switch to a more sensible migration policy with these countries. 

...and we can only be credible, if we are heard. But that can only happen, if we make a concerted effort to speak with one voice. Do you have the impression that we have finally let go of national politics in favor of common political goals which we jointly act on as Europeans? 
No. There are still the national policies, and especially, there is a race between the French, the Germans, the British and the Americans to be the first with a foot in the door. There is little common policy here and more national interest. 
I think we will not reach our goals when as many small national programs as possible are set up alongside European Union ones. Instead, I think it would be better, for coherency's sake, to do everything possible so that Europe can speak with one voice. 
This is what has been decided at the EU level: Programs, for example, to promote civil society and women's rights based on our principles of our values. This is where the EU should be supported, instead of having every country stewing in its own juices. 
Interview: Ute Schaeffer / gb
Editor: Rob Mudge What hasn't been done so far is undertaking a critical review, a fundamental, critical review of existing European policy. We have been conducting a very nasty policy of double standards. We pampered the Mubaraks and Ben Alis, collaborated with them on issues, like refugee controls and anti-terrorism efforts, but we've essentially closed our eyes to issues, like human rights and democracy. 
We have a credibility deficit. We need to win back our credibility, and we can only do that by actually supporting the democracy movement and not by banking on questionable stability from a military council. We need to open our markets to give their economies a chance, and we need to end our refugee control policies and switch to a more sensible migration policy with these countries. 

...and we can only be credible, if we are heard. But that can only happen, if we make a concerted effort to speak with one voice. Do you have the impression that we have finally let go of national politics in favor of common political goals which we jointly act on as Europeans? 
No. There are still the national policies, and especially, there is a race between the French, the Germans, the British and the Americans to be the first with a foot in the door. There is little common policy here and more national interest. 
I think we will not reach our goals when as many small national programs as possible are set up alongside European Union ones. Instead, I think it would be better, for coherency's sake, to do everything possible so that Europe can speak with one voice. 
This is what has been decided at the EU level: Programs, for example, to promote civil society and women's rights based on our principles of our values. This is where the EU should be supported, instead of having every country stewing in its own juices. 
Interview: Ute Schaeffer / gb
Editor: Rob Mudge We have a credibility deficit. We need to win back our credibility, and we can only do that by actually supporting the democracy movement and not by banking on questionable stability from a military council. We need to open our markets to give their economies a chance, and we need to end our refugee control policies and switch to a more sensible migration policy with these countries. 

...and we can only be credible, if we are heard. But that can only happen, if we make a concerted effort to speak with one voice. Do you have the impression that we have finally let go of national politics in favor of common political goals which we jointly act on as Europeans? 
No. There are still the national policies, and especially, there is a race between the French, the Germans, the British and the Americans to be the first with a foot in the door. There is little common policy here and more national interest. 
I think we will not reach our goals when as many small national programs as possible are set up alongside European Union ones. Instead, I think it would be better, for coherency's sake, to do everything possible so that Europe can speak with one voice. 
This is what has been decided at the EU level: Programs, for example, to promote civil society and women's rights based on our principles of our values. This is where the EU should be supported, instead of having every country stewing in its own juices. 
Interview: Ute Schaeffer / gb
Editor: Rob Mudge ...and we can only be credible, if we are heard. But that can only happen, if we make a concerted effort to speak with one voice. Do you have the impression that we have finally let go of national politics in favor of common political goals which we jointly act on as Europeans? 
No. There are still the national policies, and especially, there is a race between the French, the Germans, the British and the Americans to be the first with a foot in the door. There is little common policy here and more national interest. 
I think we will not reach our goals when as many small national programs as possible are set up alongside European Union ones. Instead, I think it would be better, for coherency's sake, to do everything possible so that Europe can speak with one voice. 
This is what has been decided at the EU level: Programs, for example, to promote civil society and women's rights based on our principles of our values. This is where the EU should be supported, instead of having every country stewing in its own juices. 
Interview: Ute Schaeffer / gb
Editor: Rob Mudge No. There are still the national policies, and especially, there is a race between the French, the Germans, the British and the Americans to be the first with a foot in the door. There is little common policy here and more national interest. 
I think we will not reach our goals when as many small national programs as possible are set up alongside European Union ones. Instead, I think it would be better, for coherency's sake, to do everything possible so that Europe can speak with one voice. 
This is what has been decided at the EU level: Programs, for example, to promote civil society and women's rights based on our principles of our values. This is where the EU should be supported, instead of having every country stewing in its own juices. 
Interview: Ute Schaeffer / gb
Editor: Rob Mudge I think we will not reach our goals when as many small national programs as possible are set up alongside European Union ones. Instead, I think it would be better, for coherency's sake, to do everything possible so that Europe can speak with one voice. 
This is what has been decided at the EU level: Programs, for example, to promote civil society and women's rights based on our principles of our values. This is where the EU should be supported, instead of having every country stewing in its own juices. 
Interview: Ute Schaeffer / gb
Editor: Rob Mudge This is what has been decided at the EU level: Programs, for example, to promote civil society and women's rights based on our principles of our values. This is where the EU should be supported, instead of having every country stewing in its own juices. 
Interview: Ute Schaeffer / gb
Editor: Rob Mudge Interview: Ute Schaeffer / gb
Editor: Rob Mudge


Authors at Berlin festival talk about 'writing the Arab Spring' The revolts in the Arab world have inspired a body of works that try to elucidate the events. Some writers have focused on the protests; others are pondering the future role of art and literature in the region. In December 2010, a young man set himself on fire in a small Tunisian town called Sidi Bouzid. His name was Mohamed Bouazizi. With his "sacrificial gesture," as French-Moroccan writer Tahar Ben Jelloun termed it in the opening speech of Berlin's literature festival, this young man in his late twenties unwittingly sparked a series of revolts whose long-term outcomes remain uncertain but whose significance has been likened to the fall of the Berlin Wall. Ben Jelloun was so moved that he decided to write a fictional account of Bouazizi's last days. His Mohamed in "Par le Feu" ("By Fire") represents all humiliated men. "I saw him on his bed like a white mummy and thought to myself: 'This man had a life, a youth, a failed love affair, disappointments.' I wanted to return his humanity to him," Ben Jelloun told Deutsche Welle. For him, a crucial outcome of the Arab Spring is that dignity and honor have been restored to a whole generation. His mordant forays into the minds of Zine El Abidine Ben Ali and Hosni Mubarak as it dawns on them they are losing their grip on power in his other 2011 publication "L'étincelle" ("The Spark") are his modest revenge on two men who deprived so many of their  karama for so long. Mohamed Bouazizi's self-immolation effectively sparked a revolution in Tunisia This Arabic word, as British writer Johnny West explains in the introduction to his book "Karama! Journeys through the Arab Spring," combines the notions of dignity, honor and self-respect. In his volume of what he calls "protagonist journalism," West offers an animated insight into the outlook of those who were willing to risk their lives to get their  karama back. Like Ben Jelloun, he is certain that this can never be taken away from them. Moreover, he told Deutsche Welle that "there will never be a monopoly on thought by any group holding the state in any of these countries again. Intellectual opposition and freedom of thought will no longer be crushed." Fine line between dignity and indignity Optimistic as they are, the two writers are not wearing rose-tinted glasses. They are both acutely aware of how volatile the situation is in the region and of the many hurdles that need to be overcome. They know it will be a challenge for many to maintain their sense of  karama. Ben Jelloun warns that from a political point of view it has been imperative to remain vigilant since it is so much easier to revert to dictatorship than it is to build up a democracy. West suggests that the United States and the European Union implement a contemporary equivalent of the Marshall Plan, but at the same time expresses serious doubt that this will happen given the current state of affairs. "The danger of not solving the economic problems is that the indignity of being useless will be with millions every day who do not have a job, and there is only so long your memories of the great glory of the revolution can carry you," West cautioned.  Tahar Ben Jelloun says that, for him, writing is as necessary as breathing Ben Jelloun and West share the view that cultural events and literature have an important role to play. "Some, including myself, believe the explosion of Arabic popular culture has been the single most important change in the region in the last 20 years, dwarfing mere events such as wars, peace talks, terror campaigns and regime change," West writes in his book. He said that today the Arabic blogosphere was fizzing with poems, cartoons and reportages, which clearly demonstrated how important the written word was. And while Ben Jelloun conceded in Berlin that literature could not do much in the face of human tragedy, he said it was its role to accompany it, to not lie, and to be sincere. "Imagine a society without literary production, theater, cinema, music! It's impossible! Culture is indispensable. We need to dream, imagine and cultivate our senses. It's as vital as bread," he said. "The politicians should have read more"  Mohammed Achaari is excited about new trends in Arab literature In a round table discussion at the festival, this year's winner of the International Prize for Arabic Fiction, Moroccan writer Mohammed Achaari, said that contemporary Arab literature was on par with the very best of world literature precisely because it met the highest aesthetic requirements, as well as being significant in terms of content. He reported that after decades in which poets had been punished with torture, imprisonment, exile or death for broaching taboo subjects such as human rights in their works, in recent years, the novel had provided a relatively free space for young writers to examine social injustice, as well as traditionally unacceptable subjects such as politics, religion and sex. Achaari half-joked that if politicians had read more, they might have realized that their societies were in crisis. For exiled Iraqi writer Fadhil Al-Azzawi, it is crucial that writers in and from the Arab world ask themselves very carefully, now that their countries are in transition, what they should write about. "The key subject is the struggle between modernity and extremism, traditionalism and antiquated patterns of thinking," he said. "What is most important for literature and for people on the street is to examine how to modernize our societies, stop fundamentalism from developing and open up new horizons for compassionate, free and modern development." If young people are going to maintain their newly found sense of  karama and never again be driven to such despair that they choose to emulate Mohamed Bouazizi, development along these lines seems vital. Author: Anne Thomas Editor: Louisa Schaefer


International hacktivists help Syrian citizens circumvent Internet censorship As the government cracks down on protesters in Syria, hacker groups from abroad are helping people to get access to the Web and to communicate safely despite surveillance and repression. Human rights groups and the international community are calling for an arms embargo and an end to government repression in Syria, which has resulted in almost 2,000 deaths since March. Like in Egypt and Tunisia earlier this year, Syria has responded to the uprising not only with violence, but also by putting its citizens under surveillance and censoring the internet. What such regimes didn't count on was that international internet activists would step in and fight back. Since the Arab Spring began, hacktivists have been building ad hoc telecommunications systems all over the Middle East to help citizens get information on what's going on there out of these countries. When the government shut down the Internet, Telecomix helped Egyptians by getting them access to dial-up modems. Tactics of 'Telecomix' online activists are less controversial than those of the group Anonymous Rather than describing themselves as a group, members say Telecomix is an idea or a working group where international hackers – or hacktivists – get together to collaborate on particular issues. Their aims are to provide free and secure communication, anonymity on the net, freedom of speech and news via their Twitter account. And they've stepped up the game by entering the fray in the Middle East. Under Surveillance Distributing videos and sharing information about anti-government protests in Syria is incredibly difficult because the government has cracked down on all forms of telecommunications. It's become dangerous to post a picture, video or even make a phone call to try to tell others what's going on. One Syrian protester who asked to remain anonymous said via encrypted email that Iranian experts have been helping the regime spy on people. "The Syrian government and branches of intelligence are exploiting this crisis to develop their ability to try to control our words and hopes. We know they are using strong programs to do this," said the Syrian protestor. "In addition, when they arrest an activist, they try to take over his or her accounts and passwords through torture, especially Facebook accounts. So they can catch his friends who support the revolution," said the protestor, whose identity must be protected. Maha Abu Shama, a Syrian campaigner from Amnesty International, said that Syrian authorities are also using personal statements from social networking sites against people. "If people write things on their Facebook page or in some correspondences that are critical of the authorities, if they happen to be arrested, these written statements on their Facebook or Internet accounts could be used against them as evidence," said Abu Shama. Safety Guidelines To help Syrians keep safe on the internet, international hacktivist group Telecomix is giving them practical advice. Stephan Urbach explains the basic rules.  Stephan Urbach (left) and Jonatan Walck (right) of Telecomix "Safety guideline number one is to use, whenever possible, https – SSL encrypted connections. If you want to chat with people, use an instant messenger with OTR – Off The Record – it's a protocol to encrypt your communication," explained Telecomix member Stephan Urbach, who is from Germany. To secure emails, people can use PGP – Pretty Good Privacy – and Tor to obfuscate their surfing. Urbach said that if people follow these steps, it makes it difficult for anyone to read their messages. While the Syrian government hasn't shut down the Internet completely, Jonatan Walck, a Swedish hacktivist with Telecomix, said that it varies from city to city. Connections are often unreliable and may go down for hours or days. Human rights groups suspect that these cutoffs are done strategically to coincide with attacks by the security forces. Despite knowing that the Internet is under surveillance, many people are still using it, often in an insecure way. "Just as in Egypt, there's a risk of people being tracked. The government is listening," said Walck, adding, "So we listen and see when people come in and contact us, and we try to make sure that they don't get caught for it." Urbach said with a laugh that essentially around 10 Telecomix members are providing tech support for an entire country. But it's the seriousness of the situation that motivated him to act. "I just fear for the people that they are getting harmed. I am sitting in Europe, everything is fine for me. I am not there, fearing for my life. So if we can help the people feeling a little bit more secure and getting a little bit more secure, then it's worth it," said Urbach. Beyond the border The Syrian government has imposed a media blackout, so it's very difficult to find out what is actually happening in the country. But for Telecomix, this is just another challenge to be overcome. Recently they helped distribute an amateur video of a peaceful demonstration where police officers assaulted protestors, and one person was shot and killed. Telecomix not only helped him get this information out of the country, but protected the Syrian's anonymity. Yet every day, it's getting more and more difficult to get this kind of information out. "We do figure out one way or another, that they safely can get it outside of the Syrian border, and then we can of course publish it so it's up for everyone," said Walck. Dr. Asiem El Difraoui, researcher at the German Institute for International and Security Affairs, said that Telecomix and Anonymous are making a huge difference in the Middle East. 'Anonymous' hackers brought down the Syrian Defense Ministry's website this August  Both Telecomix and Anonymous try to help people directly, although Anonymous has gained a lot of media attention in recent months for its high-profile attacks against companies like Sony. But they're not just after corporations. Anonymous members also attacked the official websites of the oppressive Tunisian regime. "They really hacked into governmental websites, brought the presidential websites down and so on," said El Difraoui, and added "Anonymous is not as purely destructive as we think. The French Anonymous members, for instance, helped the Tunisians also to maintain communications in the same way as Telecomix." But the Syrian government has learned from Egypt, and instead of just shutting down the internet, they're also using social networks for their own agenda. "They try to create some solidarity movement on Facebook and the other new media, and use YouTube as well, for showing alleged atrocities by the Syrian opposition, which they deem terrorists," said El Difraoui. For Telecomix, circumventing Syrian censorship and surveillance is a constant game of cat and mouse. But for the Syrian people, their hard work and practical safety tips are really important. "The Telecomix team helps us, emotionally and physically. They give us advice on how to be safe on the internet, dos and don'ts, and they help us to spread the word," wrote a Syrian protestor via encrypted email. "[Telecomix] are like one family and they are always there for support and assistance. They are people [with] a high degree of humanity and responsibility." Hacktivists also under surveillance Due to their activities, Telecomix and Anonymous are also getting attention from the authorities. When the FBI conducted a sweep last month of Anonymous members, Stephan Ubrach from Telecomix received a letter from the Federal Criminal Police Office saying that he was no longer under surveillance. With the recent riots in London, Urbach warns that surveillance is also increasing in Western democratic countries, where leaders are contemplating Internet and mobile network kill switches. "What we are doing is showing that if they do it, we evolve and find ways to circumvent these censorship methods and hopefully our politicians in Europe learn from that, that they don't do it here," concluded Urbach. Author: Cinnamon Nippard / sad Editor: Anke Rasper


Libyan rebels, international community divided over frozen Gadhafi funds The Libyan rebels are demanding that the international community hand over the frozen assets of toppled dictator Moammar Gadhafi. But many nations remain unconvinced that the rebels can responsibly handle the money. How many billions of dollars long-time Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi has deposited abroad will probably never be fully known. According to estimates, Gadhafi has hidden $80 - $150 billion (55 billion -103 billion euros) around the world. At least a portion of his fortune has been secured by the US, which blocked some of the dictator's bank accounts. The EU has also frozen some of his money. But Gadhafi is presumed to have also tucked away many of his assets in Switzerland and several African states. The Libyan National Transitional Council (NTC) has demanded that this money be returned to them. Experts and politicians, however, remain divided over whether or not it is a sensible idea to hand the money over to the rebels at this point. Post-war reconstruction "Financial resources are one of the least important aspects of Libya's reconstruction right now," Markus Kaim, head of the international security division at the German Institute for International and Security Affairs, told Deutsche Welle. Given that Libya is already wealthy due its oil and gas deposits, the most important priority at this point should be re-establishing stability and developing political institutions, according to Kaim.  The NTC now has to rebuild war-torn Libya But Tunisian-born Hamadi El-Aouni, professor of politics and economics at the Free University of Berlin, argues that the money should be given to the rebels as quickly as possible in order to help alleviate the plight of the suffering civilian population. "Libya is suffering a lot due to the lack of medical equipment, medicine and qualified personnel," El-Aouni told Deutsche Welle. Oil interests at stake Up this point, the United Nations has turned over $1.5 billion of Gadhafi's assets frozen by the United States. Italy has also announced that it plans to hand over 350 million euros to the rebels as soon as possible. According to Kaim, Italy and other national governments are trying to get on the rebels' good side with a view toward lucrative business prospects in Libya's oil industry. "Many oil and gas contracts are being renegotiated now," Kaim said. "Many governments have legitimate reasons to hope that their oil-producing firms will benefit ." UN monitor While some states are pressing ahead, the EU is having a difficult time releasing frozen Gadhafi assets to the rebels. This is primarily because Libya lacks the state institutions that can properly handle the money, according to Joachim Hörster, a Mideast expert and member of the German parliament's foreign affairs committee. As a consequence, the EU needs to investigate whether or not it can turn the money over to the rebels in good conscience, said Hörster, a member of the conservative Christian Democrats. Many governments are waiting for the UN to pass a resolution on Gadhafi's assets  But El-Aouni believes that the money legally belongs to the NTC since the council has been recognized worldwide - with the exception of a few African states - as the sole and legitimate representative of the Libyan people. A UN committee could monitor the money, but in principle the funds belong to the Libyan people and should not be treated like Western aid, El-Aouni said. Lack of transparency Monitoring the money's distribution is no easy task and "would challenge any government," according to Hörster. "Even if the NATO allies manage to speak a common language regarding Libya's reconstruction and take care to proceed according to an agreed upon process, you still could not guarantee that the money would end up in the right place in every case," Hörster said. It is also unclear whether or not the transitional council would agree to let foreign, primarily Western powers decide under what conditions the money could be released. "The Libyans would rightfully point out that they carried out their revolution by themselves and probably would not want to submit to a Western dictate," Kaim said. With so many uncertainties, many governments - including Berlin - would prefer to wait for a clear UN resolution before turning over the money to the rebels. According to Hörster, waiting for such a resolution is the correct policy, because only then will it be clear that the money can be handed over to the new Libyan government in accordance with international law. Author: Thomas Latschan / slk Editor: Rob Mudge


Opinion: EU struggles to find a common voice on post-Gadhafi Libya EU foreign affairs chief Catherine Ashton may have missed her chance to turn Brussels into a serious diplomatic player in post-Gadhafi Libya as the member states take the lead, according to DW's Bernd Riegert. While EU foreign affairs chief Catherine Ashton still waits for official confirmation of a change in power in Tripoli, the national leaders of the EU member states are already trying to create political facts on the ground in the Libya. Italian Foreign Minister Franco Frattini has received assurances from the rebels that oil extraction contracts signed under the regime of Moammar Gadhafi with the Italian firm Eni would continue to be honored. French President Nicolas Sarkozy has given the impression that his decision to push for a NATO military intervention made the success of the Libyan revolution possible. Sarkozy, of course, would also like to secure further lucrative contracts with Libya. Germany, meanwhile, already granted the National Transitional Council (NTC) 100 million euros ($144 million) in aid before the EU has even started the discussion of lifting the current sanctions. German firms also hope to return to Libya soon. And Turkish Foreign Minister Davutoglu is ahead of the pack, visiting Benghazi and organizing the first gathering of the post-Gadhafi Libya Contact Group meeting in Istanbul for Thursday. Asleep at the wheel The EU, on the other hand, remains on vacation. Per tradition in Belgium, the European Commission and the European Council go on holiday in August, leaving behind a thin staff of subordinate officials who take action only in emergency situations. Last week, the responsible officials were called back to Brussels. Foreign affairs chief Ashton has returned to her desk and has been placing many telephone calls. Before she can go before the press and announce reconstruction plans, Ashton has to consult with the EU's most important foreign ministers, ideally with all 27. But the foreign ministers are also currently on vacation. Their next regularly scheduled meeting is set for September 12. According to custom, informal brainstorming occurs prior to that meeting in the country which occupies the rotating EU presidency, so in Poland on September 2. Ashton wants to leave the reconstruction effort to the United Nations, which will convene a summit in New York on Friday.  Deutsche Welle's Bernd Riegert The EU's first goal is to release Libya's frozen state bank accounts to the NTC, which will make outside financial support unnecessary, according to Ashton. She has also called for a roadmap to be drafted, sketching out how Libya can be rebuilt and organized along democratic principles. But why is Ashton just now calling for such a plan, six months after the uprising began? Up until now, the EU has opened a small liaison office in Benghazi, like many of the member states. That office should now move to Tripoli and become a proper EU embassy. Multilateral confusion In any case, Ashton has identified four problems that need to be addressed by any reconstruction plan: health care delivery, the collection of privately held weapons, the resumption of economic activity and the creation of democratic institutions and political parties. The EU wants to help as soon as possible in all four areas, although Ashton has not yet said exactly how. She sees her main task in coordinating the assistance of the 27 member states. As in comparable cases in Iraq and Afghanistan, many of the member states are doing what they think to be correct without serious multilateral consultations. That is particularly the case with Italy, Libya's former colonial overlord, and France which - as an important economic partner of the old regime - hopes to secure its influence over post-Gadhafi Libya. In addition, the EU, and particularly its Mediterranean member states, has a vital interest in making sure Libya secures its borders. Brussels does not want to see African refugees using a pacified Libya as a route north toward Europe. The Gadhafi regime, in a treaty with Italy, had sealed off its coast and held refugees in camps. The Mediterranean EU states are now of course contemplating something similar. Humanitarian aid The EU leads its own humanitarian mission on the Tunisian-Libyan border through its aid organization ECHO, which is currently caring for 90,000 refugees. The EU has already helped 24,000 guest workers make their way back to their home countries. In cooperation with the International Red Cross and the UN refugee agency, the EU has been providing financial help for the past six months. That has to continue. In total, the EU and its member states have provided 150 million euros ($217 million) in humanitarian aid as well as evacuation assistance. This aid should now go hand in hand with strengthened political engagement. There are serious - and appropriate - doubts about whether Ashton is in the position to shine here by demonstrating the necessary leadership and presence. Accusations were already circulating in the European Parliament in March that Ashton was the wrong choice for the job. Author: Bernd Riegert / slk Editor: Martin Kuebler


Defectors line up in Libya's Western mountains rebel stronghold Formed by defectors from the Libyan army, the Western mountains' first National Army battalion is the most experienced group among opposition rebels fighting at the frontline close to Tripoli. "We will capture and judge all those responsible for war crimes when we get to Tripoli. And we will be implacable." Such was the advice of rebel military official, Abdullah al Mehdi, to "all those Libyan soldiers who have not yet defected." A colonel with the Libyan air force until last February, Mehdi was presiding over an unprecedented event in Zintan: the graduation of the first battalion of soldiers based in Libya's Western mountains as part of the newly created National Army. The austere ceremony was held in the courtyard of Zintan's former school. The green square concrete building was turned into a prison run by the rebel council and, today, it's the headquarters of the National Army in the Nafusa mountains. "Among the 350 soldiers who deserted the region, 70 re-graduated again this afternoon," Abdulla al Mehdi told Deutsche Welle. The rebel leader added that their training had been fast "because everyone already had military training." Former Libyan Air Force technician, Mohamed Ali Abusah, was among the 70 chosen. "I defected at the very beginning of the revolution. It's much easier in the mountains because there is less pressure than in cities like Tripoli or Zawiya," the 47-year-old graduate told Deutsche Welle. He said he would remain as a soldier in the new Libyan army even when the war is over. "I've been a soldier for my whole life, there is nothing else I can do," he added. Nafusa mountain range extends along 200 kilometers (124 miles) from the Tunisian border to the foothills south of Tripoli. Since the border crossing between the two countries fell into rebel hands, opposition fighters have managed to get supplies of all kinds as well as new volunteers willing to join the fight. Many of the Western mountains rebels are poorly trained and equipped Hamza Hamad is yet another of the soldiers in the new battalion. He is 25 and didn't have much military experience when the uprising against Gadhafi began in February. "We are struggling to be in Tripoli before Ramadan next August, otherwise everything will painfully go on until September, and even onwards," the young soldier told Deutsche Welle. With the fronts in Brega and Misrata, (east and west Libya) in a stalemate, the Western mountains' front remains the closest frontline to Tripoli. Today there's only a 70-kilometer-strip of flat land between the rebels in the desert location of Bir Ghanoum and Moammar Gadhafi's residence. Loyal to Gadhafi The Berber village of Yefren has been one of the towns most severely affected by the ongoing war. The local hospital, its wall scarred by bullet holes, treats rebels wounded at the front. However, the only chain-locked room hosts two soldiers who did not defect from Gadhafi's army. Abdul, who didn't want to reveal his last name for fear of reprisals against his family in his native Sorma, said he was captured by rebel troops after being shot in his right leg: "We were told we were fighting foreign mercenaries - Algerians, Chadians, Ethiopians - and also al-Qaeda terrorists. But then we realized they were all Libyans like us… Why didn't I defect? First we had no real information about our enemy. Besides, those who tried to defect got trapped between Ghadafi's troops on the frontline and the forces holding the positions in the rearguard." He added he had already spent 25 days at the hospital and that he was being well-treated by both rebels and the medical staff. Back in Zintan, the 70 newly graduated soldiers break ranks and head for their barracks to rest. All of them are unhappy about having to fight against their former comrades. But there are conflicting opinions about whether it is too late to accept new defections. In a few days it will be five months since the Libyan war started.  Some defectors are fearful of reprisals  One soldier, Abdul Hamid Bashir, thinks defectors are not acceptable at this point. "Many of them will strive to join our ranks when they realise they've lost the war but it's too late, too many atrocities have been committed already," he told Deutsche Welle. However, Ahmed Dueb, also an "early defector," disagrees. "Even if it takes 10 months for them to defect, we should receive them with open arms. We are all Libyans, all of us are victims of the same tyrant," he said. Author: Karlos Zurutuza, Zintan, Libya Editor: Rob Mudge


The price of misguided prudence Germany's decision not to support the Security Council resolution to protect civilians in Libya exposes the lack of a coherent policy and political courage, argues Thorsten Benner. Just four weeks ago, German Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle was cheered by the crowds on Cairo's Tahrir Square for his support of the cause of freedom. An early champion of the Tunisian & Egyptian protest movements, Germany led Europe's increasingly unified response to the revolutions across the Arab world with France and Italy still reeling from their cozying up to Arab dictators until the very last minute. What a difference a month (and a crucial vote in the Security Council) can make. Today, following Germany's decision not to support the UN Security Council resolution authorizing the use of force to protect civilians in Libya the picture looks very different. Europe is again divided on a key issue of war and peace. Berlin left what remains of common European foreign policy-making at the mercy of the maddening grand-standing of French President Sarkozy. Germany now appears closer to Russia, China, India and Brazil than its key European, US and Canadian allies. Within NATO the decision to swiftly remove all German forces from operations in the Mediterranean caused further consternation. Price worth paying This all would be a price worth paying had Germany been able to make a convincing case that supporting the humanitarian intervention went against its core interests and values. There is no point in going along with a decision for the sake of blind solidarity among allies. However, Germany failed to make this case. True, by harking back to the treasure trove of his high school Latin lessons ("Respice finem!"), Westerwelle invoked prudence as a guiding star. He pointed to the downsides of intervention into an unfolding civil war: high risks, imperfect information, an unclear endgame. At the same time, the foreign minister stressed that his "position toward the Gadhafi regime remains unchanged: The dictator must immediately stop the violence against his own people." He argued that tougher sanctions would do the trick. This is the Westerwelle/Merkel doctrine of the protection of civilians through immaculate conception. As US President Obama has made it clear, at the very moment the German foreign minister uttered this doctrine "we knew that if we waited one more day, Benghazi (…) could suffer a massacre that would have reverberated across the region and stained the conscience of the world."   Lack of courage In this situation, no amount of sanctions would have made a difference on the ground. UN Security Council members had to make a choice: to go with a misguided version of prudence or to enter the risks that using force to protect civilians inevitably entails. It was a lack of courage that led the foreign minister, the chancellor and the two most prominent leaders of the Social Democrats to not support the Security Council resolution to protect civilians. It is plausible that the fear of the German voter contributed to the lack of courage. In this case, however, it would have been unwarranted fear. The German voter is certainly wary of military adventures in general and the German involvement in the war in Afghanistan in particular. But it would have taken just a modicum of leadership to convince a majority of the German public to support the effort to stop Gadhafi's murderous actions: with a clear Security Council mandate, limited objectives and many Arab states in support. It would have been an easier case to make to the German public than Kosovo more than 10 years ago where Germany decided to act without a Security Council mandate. The German public might well have supported limited German military involvement, for example through AWAC planes. Making matters worse That the German government now tries to redeem itself by expanding its AWACs role in Afghanistan, only makes matters worse. It looks like calculated selling of indulgences. This cannot be the way forward. Rather, Germany needs to have the nuanced debate on humanitarian intervention and the protection of civilians it never had because of the dominance of extreme views. In the Kosovo case in 1999, then Foreign Minister Fischer employed the reference to Auschwitz as a last resort to justify military action against Serbia. The debate on the Iraq war in 2003 was equally emotional. When Germany (alongside its fellow EU members) signed up to the Responsibility to Protect (R2P) in 2005, it was unable and unwilling to have the thorough debate on the institutional and political preparedness that this commitment entails. This is now overdue - within Germany and in Europe as a whole. This includes discussions on the Responsibility to Prevent that is an often overlooked cornerstone of R2P. Reassessing the grounds for arms deals with the Libyan regime or all too cozy relationships with Uzbek dictators would be a step in the right direction. This would be true prudence. Thorsten Benner is co-founder and associate director of the Global  Public Policy Institute (  www.gppi.net  ) in Berlin. Editor: Rob Mudge


Arab revolts spark hope among Iranian activists in Germany The uprisings in Egypt and Tunisia have kindled optimism among young Iranian-born activists living in Germany. Some say the revolts have breathed new life into the opposition movement in Iran. But others remain wary. Narges Sadjedi had one thing on her mind when Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak stepped down last week after huge, sustained anti-government protests across the country. "I wished it was happening in my country, Iran. I felt so close to it," the 25-year-old student said. "That's because I feel the pain of the Iranian people and know how strongly they too want freedom." Sadjedi, who doesn't want to use her real name because she's fearful of being targeted by the authorities when she visits Iran, is among hundreds of young Iranian-born activists living in Germany. The mass protests that have unseated autocratic leaders in Egypt and Tunisia in recent weeks have injected a new sense of optimism among them. "If you looked at the reactions of young Iranians on the Internet to the uprisings, they were happy for Tunisia and Egypt but they were also quite envious at what these countries achieved," Farnaz Seifi, a blogger, women's rights activist and journalist with Deutsche Welle's Persian service in Bonn said. "The uprisings have definitely sparked new hope among Iranians." Pro-democracy movement energized by uprisings Much of that hope is pinned on Iran's pro-democracy Green Movement, which in recent days has gained momentum with its call for protests on blogs and social networking sites.  Iran's opposition movement held a rally early this week - the first in over a year On Monday this week, it staged a big demonstration in Tehran - for the first time in more than a year. Thousands of supporters of opposition leaders Mir Hossein Mousavi and Mehdi Karroubi rallied to show their solidarity with Arab revolts and anger at Iran's hard-line leaders. The protests come amid a wave of similar unrest in the Middle East and North Africa. Many believe that the successful people power revolts in Egypt and Tunisia have served to invigorate Iran's opposition movement. "It's encouraged the people and political activists to take to the streets again after a year of brutal state repression and fear and despair," Pedram Shahyar, an activist and blogger in Berlin said. "This psychological effect of the Egyptian revolution is important." Sadjedi, a women's rights activist, said she had been in touch with friends in Tehran who had taken part in this week's protests. "They were so happy that so many people turned out on the streets. They now have hope that this is the beginning of another wave of dissent," the activist said. Learning from each other The spread of political unrest from Egypt to Iran - the first non-Arab country to be caught up in the revolutionary fever - has inevitably led to debate about the parallels between the opposition movements in the two countries, both home to huge youth populations.  Egyptian protest leader Wael Ghonim says the uprising in his country drew on Iran's 2009 anti-government rallies  Last week, Wael Ghonim, a Google executive and Egyptian protest leader told an Iranian human rights group: "I tell all Iranians that you should learn from Egyptians because we learned from you." His comments and picture were widely posted on Iranian opposition websites and blogs. Activists point out that Iran's anti-government protests in 2009, which involved huge street demonstrations for months in protest against President Ahmadinejad's disputed reelection, did indeed serve to rouse people in the Arab world. Sara Dehkordi, who helped set up a network for Iranians in Berlin in 2009 during the height of opposition protests, said the Green Movement's use of the Internet also played a pioneering role in the region. Members of Egypt's Facebook generation relied heavily on social networking tools to mobilize support in the recent uprising. "The Green Movement was one of the first to use social networking media and the Internet to communicate and inform the world of what was happening inside Iran," the 28-year-old student said. "It was a very useful strategy." 'A revolt for bread and freedom' At the same time, some activists concede that the Iranian opposition could take a few pointers from the Egyptian and Tunisian revolt. Dehkordi said Egypt's largely leaderless uprising made it a real, bottom-up people's struggle. "I think one of the weaknesses of the Green Movement is that people have waited and watched for too long about what Mousavi and Karroubi would say and react," she said.  Some say Iranian protests need to echo Egypt's call for both social and political change  The two opposition leaders are currently being held under house arrest. Others say the Iranian opposition should be aiming for the kind of broader goals that the protests in Tunisia and Egypt embraced. "Those revolts combined the question of social justice and political freedom. So it was a revolt for bread and freedom from the beginning. That was important to mobilize a broad swathe of society," Shahyar said. "In Iran however, the opposition movement has focused only on the political question of freedom. That's one reason why it hasn't been as successful as Egypt in mobilizing the poor." Iranian regime 'much more brutal' At the same time, some warn against high expectations of toppling President Ahmadinejad's regime any time soon. Blogger Farnaz Seifi, who was once arrested in Iran for alleged spying, dismissed comparisons with Egypt's swift and successful protests. "The thing to remember is that it's not just the history and culture of Egypt and Iran that are different but even their governments' ways of dealing with people," the 28-year-old said. "Iran's regime is much more brutal. Unlike Egypt, it has no international ties and has been isolated for a long time. It's not afraid to use violence against its own people." Author: Sonia Phalnikar Editor: Rob Mudge


Ancient calligraphy meets politics in modern Arabic graffiti Arabic artists push the boundaries of graffiti with their calligraphic styles and political messages. A new book published in Germany looks at what makes Arabic street art unique - and just how powerful it can be. Graffiti can be more than just a can of spray paint: It played a small part in the revolutionary change that swept the Arab world earlier this year. The uprising in Syria was incited by the arrest in early March of a group of children, aged 8 to 15, who had been caught spraying anti-government graffiti on the wall of their schoolhouse. The children were released on March 20, reportedly showing signs of torture, and people took to the streets against the regime. Since then, human rights groups say that more than 1,000 people have been killed and 10,000 arrested. Graffiti in the Arab world isn't something that is talked about much, but a new book released by Berlin-based publisher From Here to Fame aims to change that. Written by German graffiti writer and publisher, Don Karl, and Lebanese typographer, Pascal Zoghbi, the book profiles a number of important artists and introduces the Arabic alphabet and calligraphic styles to non-Arab readers. 'Be with the revolution'  Examples of Arabic graffiti are currently on tour in Germany and France Tagging a name or pseudonym is the basis of graffiti in the Western world. While there are also taggers in Arab regions, according to Lebanese typographer Pascal Zoghbi, graffiti assumes a more urgent role as a means of voicing dissent. In this way, Arabic graffiti often takes the form of political slogans like "Be with the revolution," which spread from country to country during the recent uprisings. Zoghbi remarked that it's the easiest, fastest and virtually only way for a person living in an undemocratic state to express their opinion openly. "They cannot try it in a newspaper because of the censorship. Their blogs will be shutdown or the Internet will be closed," he said. "The government is really in control of everything they do, so it’s the only way they can show their own voices." Even though graffiti has been on the rise since the so-called Arab Spring, with political slogans appearing on the streets and even on tanks, if people are caught, the punishment in these oppressive nations can be a lot harsher than in the West. The price of expression In Syria, the security army removed the fingernails of teenagers who sprayed anti-government graffiti, while in Libya some of the protestors who took their message to the street with spray cans paid a much higher price. "When they drew the resistance flag kicking out Gaddafi, they were shot by the security forces," said Zoghbi. Lebanon is one of few countries where graffiti is not illegal. Zoghbi said that as long as graffiti doesn't target a certain politician, or political party, it was ok. "But once you touch one of these big politicians or leaders, you might be in trouble," he added. "Not from the policemen, but from mafias there." In terms of style, Lebanese artists are heavily influenced by New York graffiti from the 1980's, while Zoghbi said that in other countries artists are more inspired by the natural flow of the Arabic script itself. In Palestine, on the other hand, street art takes many forms, from political statements, to murals or stencils of martyrs. The controversial barrier that Israel erected in the West Bank is a central theme used by Palestinian and internationally renowned artists like Banksy, Blu and Swoon to criticize Israeli policy. Many locals, however, are opposed to artistic representations of the wall because they think this makes it beautiful and therefore acceptable.  Artist eL Seed partnered with Hest1 for this work, "Balance"  Art with a message One of the most influential artists profiled in the book "Arabic Graffiti" is French-born Tunisian eL Seed, who now lives in Canada. eL Seed has a very strong, clear calligraphic style, based in traditional Arabic scripts, but with a fresh, urban feel. He no longer tags his name on walls or signs his murals, but instead has adopted a proverbial tradition where the message takes precedence. His large-scale pieces embody proverbs such as "Respect our elders," "Inspiration," (top picture) and "I need my history." "He really modernizes [the art form] or makes it urban so it appeals to the young graffiti writers in Beirut for example. Everybody knows him and likes his work," Don Karl said of eL Seed. Artists like eL Seed tap into ancient traditions with their work. Like many alphabets around the world, Arabic can be traced back to 1300 BC to the Phoenicians who first developed phonetic characters. The Arabic alphabet itself originated around 500 BC. From the set of symbols, other calligraphic styles like Thuluth, Naskh, Farsi and Diwani developed. The book includes a brief description of these different calligraphic styles, including the oldest and most refined Arabic script, Kufic, which branched off in two directions. The smoother, curvilinear style was used in North Africa and Spain, while the Square Kufic style was used in the East. Parisian connects with ancient script L'Atlas is a Paris-based artist who caught the graffiti bug in the 80s and 90s, but looked further than the Latin alphabet he grew up with. Obsessed with letters, he began to study Chinese and Arabic calligraphy by himself. After meeting Arabic calligraphic masters, l'Atlas studied in Morocco, Egypt and Syria, and developed a passion for the Square Kufic script. L'Atlas developed a new kind of alphabet, melding Latin letters into the geometric Kufic forms in an attempt to explore new visual possibilities and to bridge the gap between East and West.  Removable tape keeps l'Atlas within the legal boundaries After being caught by police while doing graffiti in 2001, l'Atlas decided to start expressing his ideas legally by using gaffa tape on the ground. He began to create compasses in a cryptogram style, directly outside the subway exits in Paris in white gaffa tape, hoping to encourage people to question their personal direction in life. "My way was just an example to ask to people like the compass: 'Where are you going? What are you doing?'," explained l'Atlas. The compass was also a representation of himself as an artist, who came from the underground and had to negotiate the city and the art world. Within just a couple of years, everyone in Paris had heard of l'Atlas and his quest to bridge continents, eras, and art forms. A musical script There are clear similarities between Western and Arabic graffiti; in both genres, the letters are extended and intertwined. Zoghbi insists, however, that Arabic graffiti has a different feel to it. "It's more dancing than being structured together. It's more a musical script," he described. The "Arabic Graffiti" book and exhibition tour moves on to Toulouse on June 11 and Nantes on June 18. Author: Cinnamon Nippard Editor: Kate Bowen


Strolling Berlin's Gaza Strip The Turkish community might dominate Kreuzberg, but Neukölln is Berlin's Arab heartland. Deutsche Welle's Stuart Braun explores Little Beruit. The Al Jazeera Konditorei or pastry shop on Neukölln's Sonnenalle is sparkling, a mirrored shrine to baklava, that nutty, syrupy Arab sweet that rules over Strüdel in this part of Berlin. The young woman serving me explains that this desert - of myriad varieties, I order mine with pistachio - is Palestinian, which is where her family came from before they moved to Lebanon, some time after the 1948 Israel-Arab war. Seventeen years ago the family joined a wave of nearly 80,000 Palestinians that have moved to Germany, most escaping the Lebanese civil war in the 1970s - and often a life as fringe dwellers in refugee camps, a situation continuing to this day. Most ended up in Berlin, the Palestinian capital of Europe - at the time via Schönefeld airport in the East, where they could fly to without a visa before seeking asylum across the Wall. They soon established a thriving community in Neukölln along the so-called Gaza Strip, the main drag of an area since dubbed Little Beirut. The Palestinians make up nearly half of Berlin's pan-Arab diaspora - including Syrians, Iraqis, Egyptians and some Tunisians - a rich seam of the city's ethnic admixture, and vying with the Poles as the second largest Berlin minority (after the Turks). Little Beirut After leaving the pastry shop, I head for a carrot juice at a Palestinian café a few meters along Sonnenallee, served by a woman in hijab, or head scarf, who offers a range of elaborate fruit and vegetable juices, sundaes and tees, reminding me of my time in Iran. Up on the wall, two German flags hem a Palestinian flag; there are also numerous depictions of the prophet Mohammed, scenes from Mecca, and a broken violin. As-Salamu Alaykum (peace be upon you) is the chorus as the regulars come and go. 'Berlin is beautiful, there are people here from many countries,' says the shop owner. Soon I'm buying groceries from an Iraqi, check my jacket in for cleaning with a Syrian woman who'd come from Damascus via Beirut and enjoy the best spinach Borek of my life care of some Kosovars. Sorry, the latter, while Muslims, aren't Arabs so I'll stick to the program. In the space of 200 meters it felt as if I'd crossed the entire Middle East. I even drop into the Sahara hookah lounge on the way home - a couple of blocks over and run by Palestinians - but it's a bit early. "The Iraqi population is small, but we are all Arabs," says the owner of the Babylon grocer where I stock up on chickpeas and try my luck with some canned hummus. The nuts look good, too, while half the shop is bejewelled in hookahs (water pipes). "Berlin is beautiful, there are people here from many countries," he adds. He's been here for 14 years while his friend across the counter, younger, a Palestinian Lebanese, says he came when he was a child. "We are one community," says the owner, his friend agreeing. "There are no problems." "I went back to Lebanon for a holiday recently; it's very beautiful, more beautiful than here," says the woman at Al Jazeera as I eye more treats. "But I wanted to come back. Berlin is my home." She says education is poor in Lebanon, that there's no social security; plus there is much more freedom in Berlin. "Here I can smoke at the café with my friends," she explains. And she doesn't wear a headscarf, unless she attends mosque. There are 72 to choose from in the city. But Berlin's Arab scene extends beyond the Gaza Strip. I know an Egyptian guy, a chef, who works in my local German restaurant in Kreuzberg, and is a regular at the Horus Egyptian cafe up the road, which has been especially busy during the recent revolution. He's secular, says he has many different friends in Berlin, and a German wife. The woman at Al Jazeera also says she mixes with Turks and Germans, among others, not just Lebanese. Sounds like a milieu, not exactly the controversial picture of a parallel society suggested by politician and author Thilo Sarrazin. Or is it? Integration? I want to know more, so head into the middle-class heartland of West Berlin to meet Ralph Ghadban, a Lebanese scholar who also came to the city in the 1970s. After first writing his PhD, he then worked with the Arab refugee community for 17 years in Berlin. Ghadban, who has written the only book on the Lebanese minority in the capital, has made it his mission to integrate the community into a secular society based on 'democratic pluralism,' meaning fundamental shared values like individual rights. But Ghadban fears it hasn't worked. He partly blames the policies of the German government, who long refused to integrate refugees, keeping them on temporary visas that forbade them to work, and which consigned them to welfare-dependency. Now, he says, 90 percent of Lebanese/Palestinians - most have since received German residency - are on the dole. In the 90s, the government shifted from a "xenophobic" policy to a policy of multiculturalism, but the problem for the Arab community, says Ghadban, is that Islamicists were welcome to take up the slack. He fears that religion, and not pluralism, has taken hold, and that younger generations are not engaging with the mainstream, causing ongoing unemployment, and higher criminality. He also cites very low intermarriage between Arabs and Germans. No doubt, Neukölln is thick with mosques, including the House of Peace inhabiting a former church. Attended by Arabs and Turks, it's strange to see this community milling around the red brick church, hijab stores and Islamic centers ringing the precinct. But the mosque is trying to reach out, translating prayers into German, and offering integration and German language courses for women. Imam Mohamed Taha Sabri has publicly acknowledged "problems" among the Arab minority, and wants to combat youth criminality with education. It's complex. But walk the streets of Neukölln, and you get the feeling the Arab diaspora, especially the Palestinians, are trying to recreate the community they lost. I consider that their homeland is occupied; they have nowhere to go back to. The owner of the legendary Azzam restaurant on Sonnenallee says his family lived in Palestine for over a thousand years before they moved to Lebanon. After we swap notes, he piles my plate with extra falafel. Heavenly. Author: Stuart Braun Editor: Kate Bowen


White House ignored multiple warnings about crisis in Egypt There's a general consensus among policymakers and analysts that the uprisings in Egypt and elsewhere were unpredictable. That's untrue. There were plenty of experts who warned concretely about an impending crisis. When hundreds of thousands took to the streets first in Tunis, then in Cairo, Western governments were caught off guard just as much as the dictatorial regimes that were the target of the protests. The US, arguably the country with the strongest interests and the most leverage in the region, was still scrambling to make sense of Tunisian President Ben Ali's swift exit when the next regime, this time in Egypt, crumbled. Without a clear crisis management plan at the ready, the Obama administration's reaction to the events in Cairo waffled between tenuous support for the protestors and continued allegiance with the Mubarak regime, a key US partner in the Middle East. Taken by surprise The remark by Vice President Joe Biden, probably the Obama administration's most experienced foreign policymaker, in the midst of Egypt's uprising that he wouldn't classify Hosni Mubarak as a dictator serves perhaps as the most telling sign that the US government was unprepared for the events that rocked the Middle East. But as it turned out the vast network of US intelligence services was apparently equally flabbergasted by the revolt in Egypt as their political counterparts. While the CIA director's statement before Congress that there was a "strong likelihood" that Hosni Mubarak would step down the same night proved wrong and made the most headlines, the more damaging remark actually came from Leon Panetta's boss. The director of national intelligence, James Clapper, testified before Congress that Egypt's Muslim Brotherhood was "largely secular" and "eschewed violence" only to have his statement later corrected by a spokesman. President Barack Obama, according to a February 4 article in the New York Times, was unhappy with the information and analysis he received on the uprising in the Middle East by his intelligence services. Internal White House study on Egypt However, instead of relying on the CIA and others to prognosticate events in Egypt and elsewhere the president could have simply turned to his own advisors. As reported by the New York Times, Obama himself commissioned a secret review of possible unrest in the Middle East back in August 2010. The so-called Presidential Study Directive concluded that numerous countries in the region were prone to mass unrest without serious political changes, wrote the paper. The 18-page report so far hasn't been officially submitted, but is apparently helping the US deal with the events. Still, the crucial question why the White House didn't act on its in-house information prior to the crisis in the Middle East remains unclear. While the Presidential Study Directive was conducted in secret, the Obama administration also was repeatedly alerted publicly to the dangerous situation in the Middle East, particularly in Egypt. A high-level Working Group on Egypt, consisting of a bipartisan cadre of former government officials, human rights activists and Middle East experts, sent numerous letters to US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton in spring of last year repeatedly urging the administration to press for serious reforms in Egypt to avert a possible conflict.  The plight of young people was a cause for the revolt in Egypt The heads of the Working Group on Egypt, Michele Dunne and Robert Kagan, then followed up with an op-ed in the Washington Post in June 2010, warning that "the Obama administration, in pursuit of an illusory stability, stands mute and passive as the predictable train wreck draws nearer." And according to the Washington Post, the group also had meetings with senior State Department officials. So why did the administration not heed the advice of the experts? "I think they didn't share the urgency that some of us on the outside felt about this," Michele Dunne, a co-chair of the Working Group on Egypt told Deutsche Welle. "That things in Egypt were deteriorating dangerously, that there could be an explosion at some point if Mubarak didn't undertake some reform measures." Conflicting positions Dunne, who is a Middle East expert at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace in Washington and editor of the online journal the Arab Reform Bulletin, thinks the US administration was in two minds about what to do in Egypt. While Washington saw the situation in Egypt deteriorating after the renewal of the state of emergency and the rigged election, it found it difficult to act upon it, adds Dunne. "The United States government has a lot of interests to work with Egypt and I think they weren't really sure how to press strongly for improvements for human rights and democracy while at the same time working with the Egyptian government on diplomacy, security, and counterterrorism." What's more, many experts, not just those inside the Obama administration, simply underestimated the potential for revolt in Egypt. "I think that most analysts didn't take seriously trends and developments that we saw in Egypt over the last few years," argues Dunne. To her the youth bulge in the country coupled with a high level of unemployment and increased political activism over the Internet was an alarm signal. Real revolution But others didn't think so. "This was seen as just a virtual political activism, not real political activism and I think the link that most analysts missed was the possibility that these activists who were organizing by the tens of thousands on the Internet could actually take it to the streets," says Dunne who emphasizes that she doesn't want to claim that she predicted the revolution would occur when it did, because she didn't. "However, I did see this year as being a very volatile time in Egypt because of the succession issue," she notes. "Because President Mubarak is 83 years old everyone knew he wouldn't be in the presidency much longer." Over in Israel, Tamir Sheafer, an associate professor of political science and communication at Hebrew University in Jerusalem, was also not terribly surprised by the uprising in Egypt. Democratic gap Since 2008 Sheafer and a colleague have been working on a major study on political instability that will be published in the coming months. Their goal: Predicting a country's potential for political instability. To do that, they analyzed 90 countries looking at the usual publicly available variables such as political diversity and income distribution. But then they added a twist to their approach that makes their analysis unique. They created a variable they call the democratic gap. "This democratic gap is the difference between the democratic values of the people and the level of democracy that is provided to them by the political system," explains Sheafer. "So if for instance people are holding high democratic values but they live in a dictatorship we have a large negative democratic gap. While if the people don't want much democracy, but live in a democracy we have a positive democratic gap, i.e. they are getting more democracy than they want." Their major finding is that in countries that have a negative democratic gap there is more political instability. "This is not a big surprise," admits Sheafer freely. "It just makes sense. The unique thing about our study is that we have managed to measure it." Ripe for unrest You can probably guess now which country ranked among those with the highest negative democratic gap.  The US underestimated the level of dissatisfaction with the Egyptian regime "In Egypt we see one of the largest democratic gaps among all 90 countries which means that in 2008 our measures show that the difference between the democratic values of the people and the level of democracy that they were given by the political regime was very large," says Sheafer. Besides Egypt the three other countries with the largest democratic gap are Iran, Thailand and China, says Sheafer. Among those Iran displays the biggest discrepancy between the democratic aspirations of its people and the level of democracy granted by the regime. While Sheafer repeatedly stresses that the democratic gap method can't predict unrest in a country, it certainly does serve as an indicator that the climate is ripe for political unrest. "We do see that in those countries where the negative democratic gap is the largest - Iran, Thailand, China and Egypt - after 2008 in three of them except China we experienced extreme phases of instability and violence," says Sheafer. As to the vulnerability of other regimes in the Middle East, Sheafer says while they don't have data on Libya, Yemen and Bahrain, Jordan actually has a positive democratic gap and thus according to their data would appear to be less prone to unrest. However two other countries to look out for in the region are Saudi Arabia and Morocco, adds Sheafer. Both have a clear negative democratic gap. Author: Michael Knigge Editor: Rob Mudge


Ex-Blackwater chief's new army causes alarm in Persian Gulf A mercenary army formed by Erik Prince, the former chief of the Blackwater private security company, at the behest of an Arab prince is causing concern in the Persian Gulf and raising uncomfortable questions in the US. As the Arab Spring turns tentatively to summer, pressure continues to build in those countries across North Africa and the Middle East which have already been rocked by revolution, those currently embroiled in uprisings and those which are bracing themselves for potential upheaval. At such an uncertain time in an area of such heightened instability, the creation and deployment of a large mercenary force in the Persian Gulf is akin to dropping a burning match into a puddle of petroleum. But that is exactly what Sheik Mohamed bin Zayed al-Nahyan of Abu Dhabi has done by hiring the man behind Blackwater to create a private army for him. According to a report in the New York Times, Erik Prince, the controversial former Navy SEAL who founded, then sold, the notorious private security company which now operates under the name Xe Services, has been paid $529 million (372 million euros) by the Crown Prince to form a paramilitary force of foreign mercenaries, including former members of the US Special Forces, British SAS and the French Foreign Legion. The mercenaries, some attracted to the United Arab Emirates from deployments in Iraq and Afghanistan by salaries of more than $200,000 a year, will train an army largely made up of Colombians and South Africans to assist the UAE government with intelligence gathering, security, counterterrorism and suppression of any revolts. Estimates put the number of mercenaries recruited at between 580 and 800 but Prince's new venture, known as Reflex Responses or R2, is expected to expand into the thousands as demand for private military assistance from other governments under threat in the region increases. Prince fled the US to the UAE as investigations heated up It is alleged that Prince, who is keeping a low profile and who allegedly uses the codename 'Kingfish' to avoid his name being linked to documentation, is planning to expand Zayed Military City, R2's secretive compound in the desert roughly 32km (20 miles) outside Abu Dhabi, in anticipation of deals with other Gulf regimes. While Prince is said to be the key decision maker and the man who ordered the bolstering of the Colombian contingent with the better trained and disciplined South African mercenaries, it is believed that the UAE military intelligence branch is overseeing the entire project while the UAE government is named as the supplier of hardware for the troops. The New York Times reports that Sheik Mohamed has allegedly given R2 orders to avoid recruiting Muslims, saying that they couldn't be trusted "to kill fellow Muslims" - suggesting the mercenaries may be used in interventions similar to those in Bahrain in March involving troops from the UAE, Qatar and Saudi Arabia to violently suppress the uprising there. Mercenaries' role "Domestically, the force would allow the ruler of the UAE to put down revolts and deal with upheavals more effectively than other Arab dictators," Dustin Dehez, an expert on the use of mercenaries and former director for North-Eastern African Studies at the Düsseldorf Institute for Foreign and Security Policy, told Deutsche Welle. "The Tunisian and Egyptian armies disobeyed the orders they were given by their civilian leaderships which were then basically toppled in a de facto coup d'état," he added. "The reasoning behind R2 could be that a foreign force would be immune to that sort of disobedience. On the other hand, this is by no means guaranteed. It might well be that many contractors, coming from Western militaries, might also refuse to fight unarmed civilians." The Gulf's Sunni leaders fear Iran and popular uprisings The UAE's Sheik Mohamed is just one of the many Sunni leaders in the region who are deeply apprehensive about the popular unrest of the Arab Spring as well as the perceived threat from Shia Iran. The Crown Prince is known to be a trusted Pentagon associate and a supporter of military intervention against the Islamic Republic. A WikiLeaks report last year revealed that he allegedly told the Americans in 2006 that he was "unwilling to wait much longer" in regard to taking military action against Iran. There are fears that, as well as being employed to put down domestic uprisings, the force could be used beyond state borders in any conflagration should the wave of unrest exacerbate regional tensions, especially with Iran. Proxy army against Iran "No Arab nation is capable of dealing with a potential threat from Iran," Dehez said. "In a direct confrontation with small units of the Iranian Revolutionary Guards, who are specialized in asymmetric warfare, R2 could well be an effective force." The UAE also have a long-standing territorial conflict with Iran over the islands of Abu Musa, Greater and Lesser Tunb which Iran has occupied and on which it is currently increasing its military presence. "The mercenary force would give the Arab states more options in dealing with Iran in various military scenarios such as these," Dehez added. Blackwater operated for the US government in war zones The idea that R2 could be used as a proxy army by Gulf States in a confrontation with Iran has prompted a number of questions to arise over the potential role of the United States government in its creation. US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton was challenged in a letter by a group of congressmen in Washington earlier this month to reveal any continuing connections between the US government and Erik Prince. To date there has been no official response. Prince's Blackwater was the largest private military company on contract to the Pentagon during the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan. Despite its role in the deaths of Iraqi civilians in Baghdad in 2007 and on-going legal investigation into its growing list of misconduct, there is concern on Capitol Hill that the US government has retained its links to Prince. Questions over legality "It is very likely that the US government will be aware of the mission," Dehez said. "That doesn't necessarily indicate that they approve of it or endorse it. However, balancing Iran is largely a US interest, so some tacit approval might be considered reasonable. But more than that seems rather unlikely." There are also concerns over the legality of R2's operations. US federal laws prohibit American citizens from training foreign troops if they did not secure a license from the State Department. Under US law, Prince's company is exporting a defense product and therefore falls under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations controlled by the US State Department. A statement from the State Department, republished by the New York Times, neither confirmed or denied that R2 had such a license to operate. Loyalty lasts as long as a pay check for most mercenaries "It is illegal to have Americans train and equip mercenary groups unless the State Department has specifically set a policy and agreement with the host country," Patricia DeGennaro, an adjunct professor at New York University's Department of Politics and a Senior Fellow at the World Policy Institute in New York, told Deutsche Welle. "The whole initiative could backfire on the US because it is not clear that the forces will be used solely for protection of the state." DeGennaro described the creation of R2 as a "frightening" development in asymmetrical warfare, warning that armies operating with financial rather than national security interests posed a greater risk to stability due to their fluid allegiances. "There is a reason that a military is organized through a state," she said. "It is supposed to be an entity that manages violence and protects or maintains the security of the state." "Having organized mercenary groups sets all types of independent standards and in essence allows the creation of more groups who are out for themselves; opening doors to coups, corruption, and better planned terrorism," she added. "It is really organizing and equipping gangs to reach a whole new level of intimidation and control of weaker individuals and states that can't protect themselves." Author: Nick Amies Editor: Rob Mudge


Iran backs change in Egypt but fears uprising of its own The geostrategic benefits of having a new, friendlier government in Egypt have prompted Iran to offer its support to anti-government protestors but the possibility of the wave of unrest hitting Tehran is causing concern. As the bloody battle for control of Egypt continues, many world powers are still walking a fine line between maintaining links with President Hosni Mubarak and supporting the rights of the protesters who are fighting to bring his 30-year reign to an end. The common position of most is to urge both sides to show restraint and to allow free speech and democracy to determine the future of Egypt. However, true to form, after a series of muted and cryptic statements, one country has come out firmly on the side of the protestors: Iran - the only country in the region that does not have diplomatic relations with Egypt. Eralier this week, the Iranian Foreign Ministry released a number of statements praising the popular anti-government uprising and has pledged its support for movements intent on removing "puppet autocratic regimes." Claiming the uprising was the beginning of an "Islamic renaissance in the Middle East," the ministry said that Iran hoped that the protests would empower nations in the region to "stand up" to its enemies, Israel and the United States. Iran has accused the United States and Israel of meddling in Egypt and of stifling the popular movement intent on removing Mubarak. It called for "world leaders and peoples to harshly reject US and Israeli interference aimed to deflect the fight for justice in Egypt," adding that any opposition to the Egyptian popular movement will cause "the ire of people throughout the world, especially Muslims." Egypt's peace deal with Israel has rankled with Iran It is unsurprising that Iran has taken this position given the opposition Mubarak has maintained against the Islamic Republic throughout his decades in power; Egypt has opposed Iran's nuclear program, signed peace accords with its arch-enemy Israel and has actively hindered Iran's covert attempts to arm Hamas militants in Gaza by clamping down on weapons smuggling across its borders. Mubarak's opposition has fostered a mutual suspicion and distrust in Tehran, one that has allegedly prompted Iran to actively seek his removal in the past. While there has yet to be any firm evidence to support claims that Iran has had a hand in the recent protests, a 2009 US embassy cable released through WikiLeaks claimed that Mubarak was convinced that Iran was promoting the destabilization of Egypt through Hezbollah cells and the Muslim Brotherhood. Iran's dream of a united Islamic front deemed "delusional" Analysts believe that Iran has a geostrategic interest in the unrest in Egypt as the fall of the secular, pro-Western Mubarak regime would severely weaken its main rival in the region and perhaps lead to a more hard-line, Tehran-friendly Islamic ruler taking power. However, Dr. Walter Posch, an Iran Expert at the German Institute for International and Security Affairs, believes that Iran's hopes for a united Islamic front with a new Egyptian leadership are unrealistic.  The Muslim Brotherhood is unlikely to play ball with Iran  "Should Islamists take over, they will certainly not do Tehran's bidding as we have already seen with Islamist groups in Iraq and elsewhere," he told Deutsche Welle. "Strong countries where Islamists rule, like Turkey, even became formidable competitors for Tehran, and this will certainly happen with Egypt too if the Muslim Brotherhood should dominate the political outcome - which is far from assured." "Even the Muslim Brotherhood has said it will honor the most important point in regional politics: the Israeli-Egyptian peace agreement," he added. Others say that Iran's main hope is that a new leadership would not be so reliant on US support. "The hope in Iran is that the leadership that replaces Mubarak is one which is independent from the United States and one with a strong Islamic element would be even more ideal," Paul Freiherr von Maltzahn, the former German ambassador to Egypt and current executive vice president of the German Council on Foreign Relations (DGAP), told Deutsche Welle. "However, I am of the opinion that it is unlikely that this leadership will include the Muslim Brotherhood and I agree with the general belief that even if the Brotherhood were included in a new government, they would not be favorable toward Iranian interests." Despite this possibility, Iran's Islamic leaders, including Ayatollah Khatami, are still hoping the unrest seen in Egypt - as well as that which led to the overthrow of Tunisian President Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali - will usher in a new era of Islamic rule in the wider region that "withstands the Zionist occupiers" - the name Tehran has given Israel, a country it will not acknowledge. Iranian opposition emboldened by popular uprisings While the fall of the Mubarak regime may be a positive result for Iran for many reasons, including the possible encircling of Israel by unfriendly states, the regime in Tehran is also harboring a number of its own concerns.  Iran's own protests in 2009 were brutally put down  Iran's domestic opposition movement, which took to the streets in 2009 to protest the disputed re-election of President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, is also supporting the uprising in Egypt. While the regime and the opposition, led by Mir Hossein Mousavi, both appear to be identifying with the protestors, there are two competing narratives. While the regime sees the chance for an arch-rival to be overthrown, Mousavi and his supporters see the "people power" in Tunis and Cairo as an encouraging development for their own movement and hope that the unease created by the uprisings could prompt the hard-line rulers in Tehran to allow greater freedoms in Iran. Mousavi has pointed out that the grievances which prompted the 2009 mass protest movement in Iran, which was violently crushed by the state's Revolutionary Guards, are the same as those which have fired the protests in Tunisia, Egypt, Yemen, Algeria and Jordan. "Beneath the surface Tehran looks more soberly at the protests," Dr. Posch said. "The lack of any Islamic message in the protests and the irrelevance of Islamist organizations in Tunis and Cairo in organizing the protests, the fact that anti-imperialism was not the key factor, the insistence on good governance and civility shows that political dynamics in the region have reached a level where foreign bogeymen are irrelevant - which is a dramatic brake of political culture in the Middle East." "In fact Tunis and Cairo 2011 have more in common with the protesters in Tehran 2009 where the urban middle class made its voice heard in favor of good governance, transparency, the rule of law and human rights." However, von Maltzahn believes Iran's history and culture of protest makes a similar uprising almost impossible to imagine in the Islamic Republic. "There is of course the chance that there could be a spark in Iran that leads to new protests and the regime is concerned about this." "However, the problem in Iran is that the middle class who took to the streets in 2009 have long and very bad memories, not only of the suppression of two years ago but going back to the 1979 revolution. This is a traumatic memory for many in Iran and as such there is little or no possibility of similar protests attempting to take down the Iranian regime." Author: Nick Amies Editor: Rob Mudge


Egypt braces for more protests as ElBaradei seeks to galvanize opposition The violent protests that have rocked Egypt have also rattled President Hosni Mubarak's regime. Could Mohamed ElBaradei's return be the galvanizing force to form a cohesive leadership which could push for real change? Egypt is bracing for widespread demonstrations on Friday, as Egyptians angry with the 30-year authoritarian rule of President Hosni Mubarak continue their protests against corruption, unemployment and government oppression. The interior ministry has warned that it would use "decisive measures" to crack down on the demonstrators. The opposition movement Muslim Brotherhood said it would take part in the protests. At least 20 members of the country's largest opposition force were arrested overnight. So far seven people have been killed in clashes between police and the protesters and more than a 100 injured. The unrest began on Tuesday, called by some the "first day of the Egyptian revolution." Protesters called on the 82-year-old leader to stand down and leave the country in echoes of the recent revolt which toppled the government in Tunisia. Mohamed ElBaradei, who has been calling for political reforms and is seen by many as the oppostion figurehead, called on Mubarak to step down and said he would be willing to lead an interim government if the public asked him to do so. "It is a critical time in the life of Egypt. I have come to particpate with the Egyptian people," he said after returning to Cairo late on Thursday. Disillusionment with the Mubarak regime has been growing rapidly since the parliamentary elections in November handed the president's NDP party a 93-percent majority. Mubarak's opposition rivals claimed the polls, seen by observers as the least free and fair elections in a long time, had been rigged. With presidential elections scheduled for later in the year, a new breed of anti-government activists have apparently taken heart from events in Tunisia, and to a lesser extent in Algeria, where popular uprisings over poverty and oppression have sent shockwaves through northern Africa's Arab states. Shouting slogans such as "Depart, Mubarak" the coordinated crowds, organized by a coalition of online activists, ignored police announcements deeming the gathering illegal, occupying city centers in numbers large enough to initially shock the security forces into inaction. Alliance of activists combine to put pressure on Mubarak Protests were organized by an online alliance of activists Following the ouster of Tunisia's president Ben Ali, several protest movements called for a mass demonstration that they called 'Anger Day' on January 25, which is the Police Day in Egypt, explained Moaaz Elzoughby, a researcher at the Arab Reform Initiative (ARI), a consortium of Arab research and policy institutes currently based in Amman, Jordan. Especially those opposition groups very active online, such as '6 April,' were involved, he said. "Almost all the Egyptian opposition movements joined the alliance and some, like the Al-Ghad party, participated actively in the organization of the protests," Elzoughby told Deutsche Welle. "The Muslim Brotherhood participated as well, but on an individual basis. The brotherhood did not mobilize all its members." According to Elzoughby, the alliance has a number of socio-economic demands, such as a minimum salary of 1,200 Egyptian pounds (some 150 euros), the suspension of the state of emergency which has been in place since 1981, a number of constitutional amendments and "a pledge from Mubarak that he will not run for a new mandate," he said. It was an unprecedented show of opposition to the ruling regime in a country whose hard-line approach to dissent is notorious and where protests are outlawed and usually quelled quickly and with brutal force. However, true to form, the demonstrations soon turned violent as they had done in Tunisia and Algeria earlier this month. Tunisian flags were seen flying alongside Egyptian banners as protestors responded to tear gas and water cannon assaults with barrages of stones in Cairo's Tahrir Square. Lack of leadership undermining the push for real change Despite the strong show of defiance, Clara O'Donnell at the Center for European Reform, a London-based think-tank, believes the opposition lacks a unifying leader to rally behind and push for real change. Analysts doubt that Egypt will become the next Tunisia "There is a big challenge to bring the opposition together in Egypt as there is no one key leader among them," she told Deutsche Welle. "So these are headless protests in a way and it makes it hard to imagine these protests leading anywhere, especially a Tunisia-style overthrow." Almut Möller, the head of program at the Alfred von Oppenheim Center for European Policy Studies at the German Council on Foreign Relations, agrees that Egypt is unlikely to follow Tunisia's lead to the same conclusion. But she believes Egypt is still entering a time of great uncertainty. "The question now is: where will these protests lead?" Möller told Deutsche Welle. "Most people who know the country well say that Egypt will never really change and that even though the conditions for most people are so severe, they will just have to continue to endure those conditions. The regime has a lot of means to control but you have to wonder where the tipping point may be." Möller believes that the protests, the coming presidential elections and the flashpoint issue of Mubarak annointing his unpopular son Gamal as his successor could combine to influence the president's next move. "With the presidential elections coming up, will Mubarak still be able to push for Gamal in this climate?" she said. "The regime is nervous and usually when there is such opposition, it comes down hard. But will they be able to crackdown with such attention focused on Egypt?" Criticism tempered by cautious approach to reform Obama has slowly toned down US support for Mubarak That international focus was led by the United States, one of Egypt's main international allies, which called on the Mubarak regime to be "responsive" to the protestors' "aspirations" and to "pursue political, economic and social reforms" which would improve people's lives. The White House statement reaffirmed the US commitment to "working with Egypt and the Egyptian people to advance these goals." The European Union has called the protests "a signal" of the Egyptian people's "wish for political change" and urged the Mubarak regime to respect and protect the right of citizens to express their aspirations in peaceful demonstrations. Europe's balancing act leads to timid support The reluctance of the EU to issue a stronger statement, according to O'Donnell, has much to do with the delicate balancing act the bloc has to maintain with repressive states with whom it has to do business. A push for reforms led to Hamas taking power in Gaza "The EU supports democracy and human rights in Egypt but it has been pretty reticent since pushes for democratic reform led to gains for Hamas in Gaza and Hezbollah in Lebanon," O'Donnell said. She said that the EU was being a lot more cautious now. "Unfortunately the EU is now weighing up the benefits of pushing for reform in Egypt because there is a real risk of instability." "Additionally, should a change in regime take place, there is the risk that the new leaders are even more unsavory than the old ones. There are concerns about the Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt but there are far more dangerous groups there who could exploit a more open society. The EU is wary of that." Author: Nick Amies, Rob Mudge (dpa, Reuters, AFP) Editor: Rob Mudge


